arXiv:2107.06172v1 [physics.chem-ph] 19 Jun 2021

Arrhenius.jl: A Differentiable Combustion Simulation
Package
Weiqi Jia,∗, Xingyu Sub , Bin Pangc , Sean Joseph Cassadyd , Alison M.
Ferrisd , Yujuan Lic , Zhuyin Renb , Ronald Hansond , Sili Denga,∗
a

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA
b
Center for Combustion Energy, Tsinghua University, Haidian, Beijing, 100084, China
c
Weichai Power Co. Ltd., Weifang, Shandong, China
d
High Temperature Gasdynamics Laboratory, Department of Mechanical
Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305, USA

Abstract
Combustion kinetic modeling is an integral part of combustion simulation,
and extensive studies have been devoted to developing both high fidelity and
computationally affordable models. Despite these efforts, modeling combustion kinetics is still challenging due to the demand for expert knowledge and
optimization against experiments, as well as the lack of understanding of
the associated uncertainties. Therefore, data-driven approaches that enable
efficient discovery and calibration of kinetic models have received much attention in recent years, the core of which is the optimization based on big
data. Differentiable programming is a promising approach for learning kinetic
models from data by efficiently computing the gradient of objective functions
to model parameters. However, it is often challenging to implement differentiable programming in practice. Therefore, it is still not available in widely
∗

Corresponding author
Email addresses: weiqiji@mit.edu (Weiqi Ji ), silideng@mit.edu (Sili Deng )

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

July 14, 2021

utilized combustion simulation packages such as CHEMKIN and Cantera.
Here, we present a differentiable combustion simulation package leveraging
the eco-system in Julia, including DifferentialEquations.jl for solving differential equations, ForwardDiff.jl for auto-differentiation, and Flux.jl for incorporating neural network models into combustion simulations and optimizing
neural network models using the state-of-the-art deep learning optimizers.
We demonstrate the benefits of differentiable programming in efficient and
accurate gradient computations, with applications in uncertainty quantification, kinetic model reduction, data assimilation, and model discovery.
Keywords: Data-driven Modeling, Differentiable Programming, Chemical
Kinetics, Uncertainly Quantification, Chemical Reaction Neural Network
1. Introduction
The optimization of model parameters plays a critical role in the development of chemical kinetic simulation tools. While heuristic optimization
methods, such as genetic algorithms, have been widely employed in combustion modeling, optimization algorithms based on stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) have seldom been exploited. Meanwhile, SGD has shown promise in
nonconvex optimization for complex nonlinear models, and SGD has played
a central role in driving the boom of deep learning in the last decade [1].
Existing optimization techniques in combustion modeling can be categorized into heuristic algorithms and response surface techniques. Heuristic
algorithms [2, 3] usually perform well with less than 100 parameters and
small datasets. In the case of the genetic algorithm, for example, the computational cost scales with the number of parameters and the number of

2

samples in the dataset. As a result, modern deep learning working in big
data regimes and deep neural network models with tens of thousands of parameters seldom employ heuristic optimization. Response surface techniques
[4] alleviate the intensive computational cost in evaluating kinetic models
by building a function approximation that maps the model parameter space
to model predictions. Similar to heuristic algorithms, response surface techniques are also limited to low-dimensional model parameter space [5] and
small datasets, as the cost of building a response surface scales with the dimension of parameter space and the number of quantities of interest. Meanwhile, recent development in sensor techniques and experiment automation
[6] have significantly increased the efficiency of experimental data generation
and driven combustion research into the big data regime. Combined with
SGD, the optimization of complex chemical models using these new datasets
becomes feasible. Furthermore, various techniques have been developed in
conjunction with SGD to increase the generalization performance of the optimized model. For instance, a modern deep learning optimizer not only
focuses on minimizing the loss functions but also regularizes the model to
increase the extrapolation capability. Generalization to different conditions
and tasks is an important feature for classical physics-based chemical models,
and generalization allows us to develop a chemical model based on canonical
combustion experiments that also works reasonably well in simulating practical combustion systems. Therefore, SGD is not only more efficient but also
more generalizable compared to heuristic optimization algorithms.
One of the major obstacles for exploiting SGD in combustion modeling
is the lack of software ecosystems that can efficiently and accurately com-

3

pute the gradient of simulation output to model parameters. For instance,
the finite difference method (often termed the brute-force method) usually
suffers both computational inefficiency, as the cost scales with the number of
parameters, and inaccuracy due to truncation error. Conversely, stochastic
gradient descent based on auto-differentiation (AD) has shown both efficiency
and accuracy in the training of large-scale deep neural network models [1].
Many open-source AD packages have been developed in the last decade, including TensorFlow [7] and Jax [8] backed by Google, PyTorch [9] backed
by Facebook, ForwardDiff.jl [10] and Zygote.jl [11] in Julia. To this end,
we introduce the AD-powered differentiable combustion simulation package
Arrhenius.jl [12], which incorporates combustion physics models into AD
ecosystems in Julia to facilitate the study of differentiable combustion modeling.
This paper is structured as follows: we shall first introduce the package
Arrhenius.jl in Sec. 2 and the formulas for various gradient calculations in
Sec. 3. We then present the application of Arrhenius.jl to uncertainty quantification, kinetic model reduction, data assimilation, and model discovery in
Sec. 4. Finally, we draw conclusions in Sec. 5.
2. Arrhenius.jl
Arrhenius.jl is built with the programming language of Julia to leverage
the rich ecosystems of auto-differentiation and differential equation solvers.
Arrhenius.jl does two types of differentiable programming: (i) it can differentiate elemental computational blocks. For example, it can differentiate the
reaction source term with respect to kinetic and thermodynamic parameters
4

as well as species concentrations. (ii) It can differentiate the entire simulator in various ways, such as solving the continuous sensitivity equations
[13] as done in CHEMKIN [14] and Cantera [15] and in adjoint methods
[16, 17]. The first type of differentiation is usually the basis of the second
type of higher-level differentiation. Arrhenius.jl offers the core functionality
of combustion simulations in native Julia programming, such that users can
conveniently build applications on top of Arrhenius.jl and exploit various
approaches to do high-level differentiation.
Figure 1 shows a schematic of the structure of the Arrhenius.jl package. Arrhenius.jl reads in the chemical mechanism files in YAML format
maintained by the Cantera community; the chemical mechanism files contain the kinetic model, thermodynamic, and transport databases. The core
functionality of Arrhenius.jl is to compute the reaction source terms and
mixture properties, such as heat capacities, enthalpies, entropies, Gibbs free
energies, etc. In addition, Arrhenius.jl offers flexible interfaces for users to
define neural network models as submodels and augment them with existing physical models. For example, one can use a neural network submodel
to represent unknown reaction pathways and exploit various scientific machine learning methods to train the neural network models, such as neural
ordinary differential equations [18, 19] and physics-informed neural network
models [20, 21]. One can then implement the governing equations for different applications with these core functionalities and solve the governing
equations using classical numerical methods or neural network-based solvers,
such as physics-informed neural networks [20]. Arrhenius.jl provides solvers
for canonical combustion problems, such as simulating the auto-ignition in

5

constant volume/pressure reactors and oxidation in jet-stirred reactors.

Figure 1: Schematic showing the structure of the Arrhenius.jl package.

In contrast to legacy combustion simulation packages, Arrhenius.jl can
not only provide predictions given the physical models, but also optimize
model parameters given experimental measurements. By efficiently and accurately evaluating the gradient of the solution outputs to the model parameters, experimental data can be incorporated into the simulation pipeline to
enable data-driven modeling with deep learning algorithms.
3. Gradient Calculation
In this section, we briefly discuss how Arrhenius.jl can enhance various
approaches for computing the gradient (sensitivity) in jet-stirred reactors,
6

shock tubes, and laminar flame experiments. In general, we deal with two
kinds of gradient calculations, i.e., steady-state solutions and transient solutions.
Examples of steady-state solutions are the modeling of species profiles in
jet-stirred reactors and steady laminar flames. Without loss of generality, we
can write down the governing equations in vector form as
F (φ(α); α) = 0,

(1)

where F corresponds to the residual vector, φ corresponds to the solution
vector, and α corresponds to model parameters, such as the kinetic, thermodynamic, and transport parameters. By differentiating Eq. 1 with respect
to the α, we obtain matrix equations for the gradients.
∂F ∂φ ∂F
+
= 0,
∂φ ∂α ∂α

(2)

∂φ
are the Jacobian matrices of the solution vector with respect to
where ∂α

model parameters. Normally, for optimization, we have a scalar loss function
defined as L = G(φ). The gradient of the loss function with respect to model
parameters can be readily achieved via
∂L
∂L ∂φ
=
.
∂α
∂φ ∂α

(3)

With Arrhenius.jl, we can leverage AD to compute the two Jacobian matrices of ∂F
and ∂F
. Unlike packages for calculating the analytical Jacobian,
∂φ
∂α
efficient computation of the Jacobian can be achieved without developing
the analytical form. In addition, general AD enables us to differentiate over
neural network submodels, which is difficult to implement using analytical approaches. If the solution variables are discretized in a computational
7

domain, e.g., the one-dimensional freely propagating flame, one can readily
leverage multi-threading to evaluate the two Jacobians without complex code
re-factorization using parallel computing.
Examples of transient solutions are auto-ignition and fuel pyrolysis in
shock tubes. The governing equations are in the general form of
dφ
= F (φ, t; α).
dt

(4)

∂φ
A natural approach to compute the gradient W = ∂α
is solving the gov-

erning equations of W , i.e.,
∂F
∂F
dW
=
W+
.
dt
∂φ
∂α

(5)

In addition to solving Eq. 5, Arrhenius.jl leverages various adjoint sensitivity algorithms provided in DifferentialEquations.jl. For comprehensive
comparisons of various algorithms in computing the gradient of solutions
variables for transient solutions, readers shall consult [16].
In general, calculating the gradient for transient solutions involving stiff
chemical kinetic models is expensive, as computation time usually scales with
both the number of species and the number of parameters. Meanwhile, global
combustion behaviors, such as ignition delay times (IDTs), are usually more
experimentally accessible compared to measurements of concentration profiles. Recent work [13, 22–24] has substantially advanced the algorithms for
computing the gradient of IDT. This work employs the sensBVP method [22],
which converts the initial value problem (IVP) to a boundary value problem
(BVP) by treating the temperature at ignition as a boundary condition and
the IDT as a free variable to solve. In other words, the problem is converted
8

from a transient problem to a steady-state problem, similar to the solution
of a one-dimensional freely propagating flame.
4. Results and Discussion
We now present four case studies using Arrhenius.jl for uncertainty quantification, kinetic model reduction, data assimilation, and model discovery.
4.1. Application to Uncertainty Quantification
We first apply Arrhenius.jl to computing the active subspace for quantifying kinetic uncertainties. Active subspace [25] is a parametric dimension
reduction approach that identifies the low-dimensional subspace of highdimensional uncertain parameters via the singular value decomposition of
the expected parameter’s gradient. It has been applied to evaluate combustion model uncertainties in zero/one-dimensional simulations [5, 26, 27],
as well as in turbulent combustion simulations [28–30]. The active subspace
corresponds to the directions along which the simulation results change significantly, while the simulation results are almost unchanged in the kernel space.
Uncertainty quantification in combustion simulations usually suffers from the
curse of dimensionality, i.e., the computational cost exponentially increases
with the number of model parameters. With the active subspace, one can
conduct various uncertainty quantification tasks within the low-dimensional
subspace. The active subspace methodology is detailed in [25] and its key
idea is illustrated in Eq. 6:
Z
C = ∇f (x)∇f (x)T πx (x)dx = WΛWT ,

9

(6)

where x ∈ Rd represents the samples from the parameter space, πx is the
distribution of the model parameters, f (x) refers to the quantity of interest
and ∇f (x) corresponds to the gradient with respect to the model parameters. The unitary matrix W consists of the d eigenvectors w1 , w2 , ..., wd and
Λ is a diagonal matrix whose components are the eigenvalues λ1 , λ2 , ..., λd ,
sorted in descending order. If there is a gap in the eigenvalues, meaning
λr >> λr+1 , then the function f (x) varies mostly along the first r eigenvectors and is almost constant along the rest of the eigenvectors. The first e
eigenvectors are selected as active directions, i.e., S = [w1 , w2 , ..., wr ]. The
matrix C is usually approximated by Monte Carlo sampling and the number of samples required is suggested to be m = αβlog(d). The constant α
is the over-sampling factor and is recommended to be between 2 and 10,
and β is the largest dimension of the subspace allowed in subsequent utilization of active subspace. The major challenge for exploiting active subspace
in combustion modeling is how to efficiently compute the gradient ∇f (x).
With Arrhenius.jl, we now can efficiently and accurately compute the gradients and thus make the active subspace approach more widely accessible in
combustion modeling.
We used the chemical models of GRI3.0 and LLNL’s detailed n-heptane
model (Version 3.1) [31] for demonstrations to compute eigenvalue spectra.
The ignition delay time (IDT) is specified as our quantity of interest. The
thermodynamic conditions for both cases are 40 atm, 1200 K, and stoichiometric fuel/air mixture. The sensBVP approach is employed to compute the
gradient of IDT to the pre-exponential factors A of the reactions in the kinetic
model. An independent log-uniform distribution is assumed for each reac-

10

tion, and ln(A/A0 ) ∼ U[−0.5, 0.5], in which A0 denotes the nominal value
of the pre-exponential factor A, and U denotes a uniform distribution. The
number of samples drawn from the parameter space is set as m = 20 ∗ log(d)
for methane, 10 ∗ log(d) for n-heptane, and d is the number of reactions.
In Figs. 2a and c, one-dimensional active subspace can be identified for
both cases, since the first eigenvalue is larger than the second by two orders
of magnitude. The identified active subspace is shown in the summary plot,
where all of the samples are plotted against the first active direction defined
by the leading eigenvector. The summary plots in Figs. 2b and d further
show that the variations in IDT can be well captured by the first active direction, for all samples are distributed along a one-dimensional curve. Those
results demonstrate the capability of Arrhenius.jl in effectively identifying
the active subspace. With the one-dimensional active subspace identified,
one can exploit it for global sensitivity analysis, forward and inverse uncertainty quantification, and optimization.
As far as the computational cost is concerned, our approach obtained the
active subspace within one minute on a laptop for GRI3.0, while the finite
difference approach took about an hour. In addition, the model for n-heptane
consists of 4846 reactions, and 4846 is the highest dimension that has ever
been achieved in uncertainty quantification for chemical models in literature,
to the best knowledge of the authors.

11

Figure 2: (a, c) Eigenvalue spectra and (b, d) summary plots for the models of GRI3.0
and LLNL v3.1 for n-heptane. The thermodynamic conditions for both cases are under
40 atm, 1200 K, and stoichiometric fuel/air mixture. The uncertainties considered are the
uncertainties in the pre-exponential factor A. An independent log-uniform distribution is
assumed for all of the reactions, and ln(A/A0 ) ∼ U[−0.5, 0.5]. The number of samples
drawn from the parameter space is set as 20 ∗ log(nr) for methane, 10 ∗ log(nr) for nheptane, and nr is the number of reactions.

12

4.2. Application to Kinetic Model Reduction
Most skeletal chemical models are obtained by removing unimportant
species and the associated reactions from the master model, leaving the kinetic parameters of the remaining pathways unchanged after the reduction.
There has also been increasing interest in optimizing the kinetic parameters
in overly reduced reaction models to compensate for the error introduced
by over-reduction [32, 33]; this has the potential to produce a smaller model
with higher fidelity than the ones obtained via traditional reduction methods.
The reduction-optimization approach proceeds by sampling from target conditions and then optimizing the reduced model to achieve similar predictions
as the master mechanism under all sampled conditions.
Furthermore, our recent work [34] has shown that a chemical reaction network is equivalent to a neural network with a single hidden layer. Similarly,
solving ordinary differential equations (ODEs) of reaction network models
is equivalent to solving infinite-depth deep residual networks [18]. Consequently, chemical model reduction is in analogy to the compression of deep
neural networks (DNNs). The compression of DNNs is essential for the wide
application of deep learning to reduce the size and hence the computational
cost of DNNs. Deep Compression [35] is one of the most famous compression techniques, which utilizes a multi-stage pipeline for compression. It first
applies weight pruning to remove unimportant connections in the neural
network, similar to the pathway removal in skeletal mechanism reduction for
chemical models. It then applies quantization and retrains the compressed
network. Inspired by Deep Compression, we develop Deep Reduction, a twostage reduction scheme, with the first step being the conventional skeletal

13

reduction and the second step being fine-tuning the reduced model using an
SGD optimizer.
The Deep Reduction approach is demonstrated in reducing and optimizing two chemical models for natural gas and n-heptane, the master models of
which are the GRI3.0 mechanism [36] and the Nordin1998 mechanism [37],
respectively. As previously discussed, overly reduced models using classical
reduction approaches with a large threshold or intuition are first obtained,
with the number of species in GRI3.0 reduced from 53 to 23, and that in
Nordin1998 reduced from 41 to 34. The reduction is targeted for simulating natural gas engines and diesel engines with the commercial software of
Converge. For GRI3.0, we first removed the following species using an iterative reduction involving DRG [38], DRGEP [39], PFA [40], and sensitivity
analysis: C, CH3 OH, C2 H, C2 H2 , HCCO, CH2 CO, HCCOH, NH, NH2 , NH3 ,
N2 O, HNO, CN, HCN, H2 CN, HCNN, HCNO, HOCN, HNCO, NCO, Ar, and
CH2 CHO. We then further removed the species of CH3 CHO, NO2 , NO, NNH,
N, C2 H3 , and CH2 OH, CH by removing NO-chemistry for Converge has a
built-in NO module and following the reduction of DRM19 [41]. The overly
reduced model is denoted as SK23 with 23 species. For Nordin1998, the following species were removed based on the reduction of GRI3.0 above: C3 H5 ,
C3 H4 , C2 H6 , CH4 O2 , CH3 O2 , CH3 O, and C2 H2 . The overly reduced model
is denoted as SK34 with 34 species. Note that the way to produce an overly
reduced model can be regarded as a hyper-parameters subject to explore.
This work focuses on the demonstration of the optimization algorithms, and
we leave the optimal choice of removed species to future studies. It should be
noted that one can also optimize an existing empirical semi-global reaction

14

model against a detailed model without consulting the skeletal mechanism
reduction.
The kinetic parameters of these overly reduced models were subsequently
optimized to retain the predictability of the master models. The ignition delay times and laminar flame speeds (SLs) are utilized as performance metrics
to validate the overly reduced and optimized models against the corresponding master models. As shown in Fig. 3, for GRI3.0, SK23 overpredicts IDT
at high temperatures and underpredicts SL at all equivalence ratios. For
Nordin1998, SK34 significantly overpredicts the IDT at low temperatures,
especially within the negative temperature coefficient region, while the flame
speeds are hardly affected by the reduction.
The optimization of the kinetic parameters of the over-reduced models
was conducted on all three Arrhenius parameters, namely, A, b, Ea . Although both IDT and SL could be selected as targets for optimization, we
only utilized the IDT for its relatively lower computational cost than SL.
Moreover, the top ten reactions selected based on the sensitivity analysis
for the SL were excluded from the optimization, such that the optimization
will not change these key reactions for SL. We then randomly sampled 500
initial conditions covering a wide range of mixture compositions and thermodynamic states for training. For GRI3.0, the range of the pressure is 1-60
atm, that of the initial temperatures is 1100-2000 K, that of the equivalence
ratios is 0.5-1.8, and the fuel composition is set as CH4 : C2 H4 : C3 H8
= 0.85 : 0.1 : 0.05 by volume. Similarly, for Nordin1998, the ranges of the
pressure, initial temperature, and equivalence ratio are 1-60 atm, 850-1800
K, and 0.5-1.5, respectively.

15

Figure 3: Predicted ignition delay times and flame speeds: (a-b) the mixture of natural gas/air using the master mechanism GRI3.0, skeletal mechanism SK23 and optimized
SK23 OP. The ignition delay time was simulated using the fuel composition of CH4 : C2 H4
: C3 H8 = 0.85 : 0.1 : 0.05 by volume, pressure of 40 atm, equivalence ratio of 0.9. The
flame speed was simulated at 40 atm and 300 K, and (c-d) the mixture of n-heptane/air using the master mechanism Nordin1998, skeletal mechanism SK34 and optimized SK34 OP.
The ignition delay time was simulated at pressure of 40 atm, equivalence ratio of 1.2. The
flame speed was simulated at 40 atm and 500 K.

The datasets were split into training and validation datasets with a ratio
of 70:30. During each parameter update, one case was randomly sampled to
evaluate its IDT, and this process can be viewed as mini-batching with the

16

batch size of one. Instead of optimizing the Arrhenius parameters directly,
we optimized the relative changes of Arrhenius parameters compared to their
nominal values, i.e.,
p = [ln(A/A0 ), b − b0 , Ea − Ea0 ],

(7)

where the subscript 0 refers to the base model. The units of Ea are specified
as cal/mol as we tried to minimize the changes in Ea. However, if one wants
to ensure the change in Ea is relatively comparable to the change in A, one
may specify the unit of Ea as kcal/mol, as a change of 2 kcal/mol in Ea is
close to change of e times in A, such that the changes in A and Ea will be
balanced and avoid stiffness in the parameter space.
The loss function was defined as the mean square error (MSE) between
the predicted IDTs in the logarithmic scale using the reduced model and the
master model:

Loss = M SE log(IDT sk ), log(IDT master ).

(8)

The gradients of IDT to kinetic parameters were computed using the sensBVP method proposed in [22]. The Adam [42] optimizer with the default
learning rate of 0.001 was adopted. Weight decaying and early stopping were
employed to regularize the parameters, such that the optimization prefers
kinetic parameters that are close to their original values. Figure 4 shows the
training history of the loss function and the L2 -norm of the model parameters
for the Nordin1998 model. We trained the reduced model for 100 epochs and
stopped the training when the loss function as well as the model parameters
reached a plateau.
17

Figure 4: Training history of loss functions, L2 -norm of model parameters. Regularization
settings: weight-decay of 1e-4 with a learning rate of 1e-3.

The performance of the optimized skeletal mechanisms is also shown in
Fig. 3. For the IDT, as targeted in the optimization, the optimized models
agree with the master models very well for both two fuels. One interesting
observation is that the optimized models also work well for SL, although SL
is not targeted for optimization. This could be attributed to several reasons. For GRI3.0, the optimization compensates for the errors in the hightemperature chemistry seen in the predicted IDT, and those re-calibrated
high-temperature chemical pathways lead to accurate predictions of SL. For
Nordin1998, the skeletal models already accurately predict the IDT at high
temperatures as well as the SL, and the optimization does not degrade the
prediction of SL thanks to the regularization. It is worth noting that the optimized SK23 still underpredicts SL at fuel-rich conditions, potentially because
some of the sensitive reactions for fuel-rich conditions are not fixed during

18

optimization; further refinement of the fixed reactions is therefore suggested.
Furthermore, the optimization is computationally efficient. Qualitatively
speaking, previously employed genetic algorithms have to be performed on
clusters [33], while the current work was performed on an ordinary workstation within an hour. In summary, these two case studies demonstrate the
ability of Arrhenius.jl to optimize complex reaction models with high accuracy, good generalization capability, and high efficiency. Such optimization
capability will help augment current mechanism reduction techniques.
4.3. Application to Data Assimilation
While the uncertainty in chemical models is still a standing problem in the
combustion community, a general consensus on the major pathways for small
hydrocarbons (C0 -C4 ) has been reached. Therefore, such reaction models can
be assimilated with experimental data to estimate hidden information from
measured quantities [43] and guide further model refinements.
Here, we applied Arrhenius.jl to the pyrolysis of propane in shock tubes to
assimilate the measured concentration-time series data for all major species
with the detailed kinetic mechanisms of USCMech II [44]. Again, we relied
on Arrhenius.jl to efficiently compute the loss functions to 333 Arrhenius
parameters in the propane pyrolysis model. The results demonstrate the
capability of Arrhenius.jl in data-assimilation for inferring the temperature
profiles from species profiles and suggesting changes of rate constants.
The pyrolysis of propane plays a crucial role in characterizing the combustion behaviors of natural gas mixtures and provides insight into the cracking
pathways of larger fuels. We adopted the recently available experimental
dataset measured in [45] using a novel laser absorption technique based on
19

convex optimization. The dataset includes eight species profiles shown in
Figs. 5 and 6. The data includes five initial conditions, which are at 4 atm,
1250-1370 K, and with 2% propane in argon. USCMech II was adopted as the
baseline kinetic model. Similar to the comparisons in [45] to AramcoMech
3.0 [46], current kinetic models systematically over-predict the mole fractions
of propane under all temperatures. Therefore, we optimized the 111 reactions that are directly related to the pyrolysis of propane. The simulations
were carried out under constant pressure, and the governing equations for
the mass fractions of species and temperature were solved. Similar to the
studies of deep reduction, we optimized all three Arrhenius parameters of
these 111 reactions. The parameters were also scaled according Eq. 7 but
with the unit of Ea specified as kcal/mol.
The loss function was defined as the mean absolute error (MAE) between
the predicted and the measured species profiles, as shown in Eq. 9:

Loss = M AE X pred , X exp ,

(9)

where X pred and X exp correspond to the predicted and measured mole fractions of species, respectively.
The five datasets are divided into four training sets and one validation
set. The case with the initial temperature of 1330 K, being the median of the
five datasets, was chosen as the validation set. Figure 8 presents the history
of loss functions, L2 -norm of gradients, and L2 -norm of model parameters.
While the training loss slightly increases after 500 epochs, we let the training
go to 1000 epochs to regularize the changes of parameters. The training took
four hours for 1000 epochs (15 seconds/epoch).
The predictions from the optimized model are also shown in Figs. 5
20

Figure 5: Training dataset: comparisons among measurements, predictions from the baseline model, and predictions from the optimized model. The error-bar corresponds to the
estimated experimental uncertainties. Details on the experimental procedure and estimation of experimental uncertainties can be found in [45].

and 6. The optimized model performs substantially better than the baseline
model and agrees very well with the measurements. Since the temperature
profiles are linked to the fuel decomposition rates, the predicted temperature
21

Figure 6: Validation dataset: comparisons among measurements, predictions from the
baseline model, and predictions from the optimized model.

profiles are also different from those predicted by the baseline model. For
example, the temperature difference is as large as 20 K at 1.5 ms. Furthermore, the optimized mechanism also performs very well with respect to the
validation dataset, suggesting that there is no obvious over-fitting in terms

22

Figure 7: The history of loss functions, L2 -norm of model parameters. Regularization
settings: weight-decay of 1e-3 with a learning rate of 1e-3.

of the predictability.
Given the goodness of fit when compared to the measured species profiles, one can expect that the predicted temperature profiles will also agree
with the actual temperature time-histories very well. The inferred temperature using the optimized model is qualitatively consistent with the trends
in propane concentration as well. For instance, since the pyrolysis process is
endothermic, the faster the pyrolysis progresses, the faster the temperature
decreases. Therefore, such a data assimilation process could be utilized to
build a virtual temperature sensor based on species profiles. In addition, one
can utilize the same procedure to infer unknown species concentrations from
the available species measurements.
The data assimilation could also be targeted for suggesting key reactions
that potentially account for the discrepancies between modeling and measure-

23

ments. Here, we inspected reactions that have changed their rate constants
most during the optimization. To facilitate the comparisons, we lumped the
changes of the three Arrhenius parameters into the changes of pre-factor A
only, according to Eq. 7. As the changes in rate constants varies with temperature, we present the changes at the reference temperature of 1300 K. The
complete list of reactions and the changes of kinetic parameters are provided
in the supplemental materials Table S1.
It is found that most of the changes in rate constants are no more than one
order of magnitude, while changes to 18 out of 111 reactions are greater than
an order of magnitude. Future experimental and theoretical studies could be
directed to those 18 reactions. It is worth noting that the large changes in
rate constants are not necessarily indicating large uncertainties/errors in the
rate constants. The large changes could also be attributed to the randomness
in the optimization. In an effort to identify reaction rates that might be good
candidates for further study, one may further take the advantage of Arrhenius.jl’s differential programming to exploit the Bayesian approach [47], such
as Stochastic Langevin Gradient Descent. Similar to the bound-to-bound
approach [48], prior information on these rate constants from theoretical calculations and direct experimental measurements can be readily incorporated
into the Bayesian framework. Efficient Bayesian inference will also enable
Bayesian experimental design [49] to better allocate experimental resources
for the determination of rate constants. While this paper focuses on demonstrating the capability of data assimilation, we shall exploit the Bayesian
inference in future works.
In summary, the differential programming in Arrhenius.jl offers us the

24

bandwidth to simultaneously optimize hundreds of model parameters for
data assimilation, and such capacity could provide new insights and tools for
kinetic model optimization and usage. For example, in the absence of direct
measurement, this data assimilation approach could be used to accurately
infer system temperature from species measurements, or could be used to
identify key reaction rates for which further experimental measurement or
modeling work is needed. Future work will include experiments to validate
the ability of the data assimilation approach to accurately infer temperature,
through direct temperature measurement, and make use of the Bayesian
approach to identify specific reaction rates for future study.
4.4. Application to Model Discovery
Finally, we present the application to Scientific Machine Learning (SciML)
[19] by using Arrhenius.jl to develop a neural-network-based pyrolysis submodel within the HyChem model framework [50]. Our recently developed
Chemical Reaction Neural Network (CRNN) [34] approach was employed
to develop the neural network model for its interpretability, such that the
learned model complies with fundamental physical laws and provides chemical insights, as well as its compatibility with CHEMKIN/Cantera packages.
The conventional HyChem-based pyrolysis submodels require expert knowledge on the chemical kinetics which takes years to develop. On the contrary,
the CRNN approach aims to autonomously discover the reaction pathways
and kinetic parameters simultaneously to accelerate high-fidelity chemical
model development. In the following demonstration, the CRNN-HyChem
approach was utilized to model the jet fuel of JP10.
As shown in Fig. 8, the CRNN-HyChem approach models the fuel chem25

istry of JP10 with two submodels, similar to the original HyChem concept.
The CRNN submodel models the breakdown of JP10 fuel molecules into
smaller hydrocarbons up to C6 H6 , and the submodel for C0 -C6 describes the
oxidation chemistry. For proof-of-concept, we chose the same species in the
original HyChem pyrolysis submodel [50] to be included in the CRNN model;
however, it should be noted that the such chosen species can be treated as
hyper-parameters to circumvent the need for expert knowledge and achieve
potentially better performance. In the original CRNN approach [34], the
Law of Mass Action and Arrhenius Law are enforced by the design of the
structure of the neural network. Reaction orders are assumed to be equal
to the stoichiometric coefficients for the reactants. In the present study, elemental conservation is further guaranteed by projecting the stoichiometric
coefficients into the elemental conservation space. For better convergence,
the stoichiometric coefficients for JP10 are fixed as -1, and during the training, the stoichiometric coefficients are regularized to achieve better numerical
stability. The training data were generated by simulating the IDT using the
original JP10 HyChem model. A wide range of thermodynamic conditions
were considered: pressures of 1-60 atm, initial temperatures of 1100-1800 K,
and equivalence ratios of 0.5-1.5. In total, 500 thermodynamic conditions
were randomly generated using the latin hypercube sampling method. The
dataset was split into training and validation datasets with a ratio of 70:30,
respectively.

26

Figure 8: Schematic showing the structure of the CRNN-HyChem approach.

The learned stoichiometric coefficients and kinetic parameters are shown
in Table 1, where negative and positive stoichiometric coefficients correspond
to reactants and products, respectively. Qualitatively, most of the learned
pathways are H-abstraction reactions, which is consistent with the expertderived HyChem models. However, quantitatively, the learned pathways are
not the same as those in the HyChem model, and further efforts will be directed to extracting physical insights from the learned pathways. Figure 9
compares the results of the learned CRNN model and the IDTs generated
using the original HyChem model [50], and they agree very well. The results
thus demonstrate the capability of Arrhenius.jl in learning CRNN models
with hundreds of parameters, which is impossible with finite difference methods. With the increasing demand for rapidly developed kinetic models for
new renewable fuels for screening and fuel design, CRNN provides an elegant approach to autonomously derive kinetic models from experimental
27

data. Arrhenius.jl will play a vital role in enabling such kind of autonomous
model discovery algorithms. While this manuscript focuses on learning the
reaction pathways from scratch, one can also develop a data-driven model
based on existing kinetic models for similar fuels and utilize Arrhenius.jl for
the training, as demonstrated in [51].

Figure 9: Comparisons between the predicted ignition delay times using the learned CRNN
model (Y-axis) and the HyChem model (X-axis) for both the training and validation
datasets.

Table 1: Learned stoichiometric coefficients and kinetic parameters. Reaction orders are
assumed to be equal to the stoichiometric coefficients for reactants.

28

5. Conclusions
This work presents a differential combustion simulation package, Arrhenius.jl, which can perform efficient and accurate gradient evaluations across
classical reacting flow solvers. We expect that the open-source package could
greatly facilitate the integration of modern deep learning techniques into
combustion modeling, especially the physics-informed machine learning that
takes the advantage of both physics-based and data-driven modeling. We
also invite the contribution from the reacting flow community to enhance
the capability of the package and explore its potential in other applications.
6. Acknowledgments
WJ and SD would like to acknowledge the funding support by Weichai
Power Co., Ltd. ZR and XS would like to acknowledge the support from
National Natural Science Foundation of China No. 52025062. WJ would
like to thank Dr. Ji-Woong Park for fruitful discussions on the deep mechanism reduction, Dr. Vyaas Gururajan on the implementation of the sensBVP method, Dr. Travis Sikes for discussions on mechanism optimization,
Dr. Christopher Rackauckas on the usages of DifferentialEquations.jl, and
Matthew Johnson on sharing experience of developing ReactionMechanismSimulator.jl.
References
[1] Y. Bengio, I. Goodfellow, A. Courville, Deep learning, vol. 1, MIT press,
Cambridge, MA, 2017.

29

[2] G. Rein, C. Lautenberger, A. Fernandezpello, J. Torero, D. Urban,
Application of genetic algorithms and thermogravimetry to determine
the kinetics of polyurethane foam in smoldering combustion, Combust.
Flame 146 (2006) 95–108.
[3] A. Bertolino, M. Fürst, A. Stagni, A. Frassoldati, M. Pelucchi, C. Cavallotti, T. Faravelli, A. Parente, An evolutionary, data-driven approach
for mechanism optimization: Theory and application to ammonia combustion, Combust. Flame 229 (2021) 111366.
[4] D.A. Sheen, H. Wang, The method of uncertainty quantification and
minimization using polynomial chaos expansions, Combust. Flame 158
(2011) 2358–2374.
[5] W. Ji, J. Wang, O. Zahm, Y.M. Marzouk, B. Yang, Z. Ren, C.K. Law,
Shared low-dimensional subspaces for propagating kinetic uncertainty
to multiple outputs, Combust. Flame 190 (2018) 146–157.
[6] M. Tao, P.T. Lynch, P. Zhao, Kinetic modeling of ignition in miniature
shock tube, Proc. Combust. Inst. 37 (2019) 593–601.
[7] Y. Yu, M. Abadi, P. Barham, E. Brevdo, M. Burrows, A. Davis, J. Dean,
S. Ghemawat, T. Harley, P. Hawkins, M. Isard, M. Kudlur, R. Monga,
D. Murray, X. Zheng, Dynamic control flow in large-scale machine learning, Proceedings of the Thirteenth EuroSys Conference. ACM (2018),
pp. 265–283.
[8] J. Bradbury, R. Frostig, P. Hawkins, M.J. Johnson, C. Leary, D. Maclaurin, G. Necula, A. Paszke, J. VanderPlas, S. Wanderman-Milne,
30

Q. Zhang, JAX: Composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, http://github.com/google/jax (2018).
[9] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan,
T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, A. Desmaison, A. Köpf,
E. Yang, Z. DeVito, M. Raison, A. Tejani, S. Chilamkurthy, B. Steiner,
L. Fang, J. Bai, S. Chintala,

Pytorch: An imperative style, high-

performance deep learning library (2019), arXiv:1912.01703.
[10] J. Revels, M. Lubin, T. Papamarkou, Forward-mode automatic differentiation in julia (2016), arXiv:1607.07892.
[11] M. Innes,

Don’t unroll adjoint: Differentiating ssa-form programs

(2018), arXiv:1810.07951.
[12] W. Ji, S. Deng, Arrhenius.jl: A differentiable combustion simulation
package, https://github.com/DENG-MIT/Arrhenius.jl (2021).
[13] W. Ji, Z. Ren, C.K. Law, Evolution of sensitivity directions during
autoignition, Proc. Combust. Inst. 37 (2019) 807–815.
[14] R.J. Kee, F.M. Rupley, J.A. Miller, Chemkin-II: A fortran chemical kinetics package for the analysis of gas-phase chemical kinetics, Technical
report, Sandia National Lab., Livermore, CA (1989).
[15] D.G. Goodwin, R.L. Speth, H.K. Moffat, B.W. Weber, Cantera: An
object-oriented software toolkit for chemical kinetics, thermodynamics,
and transport processes, https://www.cantera.org (2021), doi:10.
5281/zenodo.4527812, Version 2.5.1.
31

[16] C. Rackauckas, Y. Ma, V. Dixit, X. Guo, M. Innes, J. Revels, J. Nyberg, V. Ivaturi, A comparison of automatic differentiation and continuous sensitivity analysis for derivatives of differential equation solutions
(2018), arXiv:1812.01892.
[17] C. Rackauckas, Q. Nie,

Differentialequations.jl–a performant and

feature-rich ecosystem for solving differential equations in julia, Journal
of Open Research Software 5 (2017).
[18] R.T.Q. Chen, Y. Rubanova, J. Bettencourt, D. Duvenaud, Neural ordinary differential equations (2018), arXiv:1806.07366.
[19] C. Rackauckas, Y. Ma, J. Martensen, C. Warner, K. Zubov, R. Supekar,
D. Skinner, A. Ramadhan, A. Edelman, Universal differential equations
for scientific machine learning (2020), arXiv:2001.04385.
[20] M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, G. Karniadakis, Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations, J. Comput. Phys.
378 (2019) 686–707.
[21] W. Ji, W. Qiu, Z. Shi, S. Pan, S. Deng, Stiff-pinn: Physics-informed
neural network for stiff chemical kinetics (2020), arXiv:2011.04520.
[22] V. Gururajan, F.N. Egolfopoulos, Direct sensitivity analysis for ignition
delay times, Combust. Flame 209 (2019) 478–480.
[23] M. Lemke, L. Cai, J. Reiss, H. Pitsch, J. Sesterhenn, Adjoint-based sensitivity analysis of quantities of interest of complex combustion models,
Combust. Theory Model. 23 (2018) 180–196.
32

[24] S. Almohammadi, M. Hantouche, O.P. Le Maı̂tre, O.M. Knio, A tangent
linear approximation of the ignition delay time. i: Sensitivity to rate
parameters, Combust. Flame 230 (2021) 111426.
[25] P.G. Constantine, E. Dow, Q. Wang, Active subspace methods in theory
and practice: Applications to kriging surfaces, SIAM J. Sci. Comput.
36 (2014) A1500–A1524.
[26] M. Vohra, A. Alexanderian, H. Guy, S. Mahadevan, Active subspacebased dimension reduction for chemical kinetics applications with epistemic uncertainty, Combust. Flame 204 (2019) 152–161.
[27] X. Su, W. Ji, Z. Ren, Uncertainty analysis in mechanism reduction
via active subspace and transition state analyses, Combust. Flame 227
(2021) 135–146.
[28] W. Ji, Z. Ren, Y. Marzouk, C.K. Law, Quantifying kinetic uncertainty
in turbulent combustion simulations using active subspaces, Proc. Combust. Inst. 37 (2019) 2175–2182.
[29] N. Wang, Q. Xie, X. Su, Z. Ren, Quantification of modeling uncertainties
in turbulent flames through successive dimension reduction, Combust.
Flame 222 (2020) 476–489.
[30] N. Wang, T. Yang, Z. Ren, Active subspace variation and modeling
uncertainty in a supersonic flame simulation, AIAA J. 59 (2021) 1798–
1807.
[31] M. Mehl, W.J. Pitz, C.K. Westbrook, H.J. Curran, Kinetic modeling
33

of gasoline surrogate components and mixtures under engine conditions,
Proc. Combust. Inst. 33 (2011) 193–200.
[32] A. Mittal, S.D. Wijeyakulasuriya, D. Probst, S. Banerjee, C.E.A.
Finney, K.D. Edwards, M. Willcox, C. Naber, Multi-dimensional computational combustion of highly dilute, premixed spark-ignited opposedpiston gasoline engine using direct chemistry with a new primary reference fuel mechanism, Internal Combustion Engine Division Fall Technical Conference, vol. 2 (2017), V002T06A022.
[33] M. Kelly, G. Bourque, S. Dooley, Toward machine learned highly reduce
kinetic models for methane/air combustion (2021), arXiv:2103.08377.
[34] W. Ji, S. Deng, Autonomous discovery of unknown reaction pathways
from data by chemical reaction neural network, J. Phys. Chem. A 125
(2021) 1082–1092.
[35] S. Han, H. Mao, W.J. Dally, Deep compression: Compressing deep
neural networks with pruning, trained quantization and huffman coding
(2015), arXiv:1510.00149.
[36] G.P. Smith, D.M. Golden, M. Frenklach, N.W. Moriarty, B. Eiteneer,
M. Goldenberg, C.T. Bowman, R.K. Hanson, S. Song, W.C. Gardiner,
V.V. Lissianski, Z. Qin, GRI-Mech 3.0, http://www.me.berkley.edu/
gri_mech/ (1999).
[37] N. Nordin, Numerical simulations of non-steady spray combustion using a detailed chemistry approach, thesis for the degree of Licentiate

34

of Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, Goteborg, Sweden
(1998).
[38] T. Lu, C.K. Law, On the applicability of directed relation graphs to the
reduction of reaction mechanisms, Combust. Flame 146 (2006) 472–483.
[39] P. Pepiot, H. Pitsch, Systematic reduction of large chemical mechanisms,
4th Joint Meeting of the US Sections of the Combustion Institute, vol.
2123 (2005).
[40] W. Sun, Z. Chen, X. Gou, Y. Ju, A path flux analysis method for the
reduction of detailed chemical kinetic mechanisms, Combust. Flame 157
(2010) 1298–1307.
[41] A. Kazakov, M. Frenklach, Reduced reaction sets based on GRI-mech
1.2, http://www.me.berkeley.edu/drm (1994).
[42] D.P. Kingma, J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic optimization
(2014), arXiv:1412.6980.
[43] M. Raissi, A. Yazdani, G.E. Karniadakis,

Hidden fluid mechanics:

Learning velocity and pressure fields from flow visualizations, Science
367 (2020) 1026–1030.
[44] S.G. Davis, A.V. Joshi, H. Wang, F. Egolfopoulos, An optimized kinetic
model of H2/CO combustion, Proc. Combust. Inst. 30 (2005) 1283–1292.
[45] S.J. Cassady, R. Choudhary, V. Boddapati, N.H. Pinkowski, D.F. Davidson, R.K. Hanson, The pyrolysis of propane, Int. J. Chem. Kinet. 52
(2020) 725–738.
35

[46] C.W. Zhou, Y. Li, U. Burke, C. Banyon, K.P. Somers, S. Ding, S. Khan,
J.W. Hargis, T. Sikes, O. Mathieu, et al., An experimental and chemical
kinetic modeling study of 1, 3-butadiene combustion: Ignition delay time
and laminar flame speed measurements, Combust. Flame 197 (2018)
423–438.
[47] R. Dandekar, K. Chung, V. Dixit, M. Tarek, A. Garcia-Valadez, K.V.
Vemula, C. Rackauckas, Bayesian neural ordinary differential equations
(2020), arXiv:2012.07244.
[48] M. Frenklach, H. Wang, M.J. Rabinowitz, Optimization and analysis of
large chemical kinetic mechanisms using the solution mapping method—
combustion of methane, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 18 (1992) 47–73.
[49] X. Huan, Y.M. Marzouk, Simulation-based optimal Bayesian experimental design for nonlinear systems, J. Comput. Phys. 232 (2013)
288–317.
[50] Y. Tao, R. Xu, K. Wang, J. Shao, S.E. Johnson, A. Movaghar, X. Han,
J.W. Park, T. Lu, K. Brezinsky, et al., A physics-based approach to
modeling real-fuel combustion chemistry–III. reaction kinetic model of
JP10, Combust. Flame 198 (2018) 466–476.
[51] W. Ji, J. Zanders, J.W. Park, S. Deng, Machine learning approaches to
learn hychem models (2021), arXiv:2104.07875.

36

