Using shock tube species time-histories in Bayesian
parameter estimation: effective independent-data
number and target selection
Huaibo Chena, Weiqi Jia, Séan J. Cassadyb, Alison M. Ferrisb, Ronald K.
Hansonb, Sili Denga,*
a

b

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
High Temperature Gasdynamics Laboratory, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA
94305, USA

______________________________________________________________
Abstract
Species time-histories in shock tube experiments provide rich kinetic information for parameter estimation, but
there are two problems in using these data in Bayesian approaches. First, the effective independent-data number is
not equal to the number of data points in a curve, so brute multiplication of all data points in likelihood function
can weaken the constraints from prior information. Second, taking all points of a curve as targets can lead to results
different from that of taking several representative points in the curve. In this paper, we employed maximum a
posteriori estimation combined with a neural network response surface to optimize a propane mechanism against
multispecies time-histories of propane pyrolysis in a shock tube. Three methods of calculating the likelihood
function are used: multiplying all points in a curve (C-160), taking the averaged likelihood in each point (C-1),
and taking the likelihood of last points (LastP). The influence of effective independent-data number was studied
by comparing C-1 and C-160. It was found that C-160 performed slightly better in fitting experimental data, but
brute multiplication overtuned the rate constants beyond a reasonable range. The larger the effective independentdata number, the more severe the overtuning, leading to only a slight improvement of model predictions. The
influence of target selection is investigated by comparing LastP and C-1. LastP outperformed C-1 slightly, which
can be attributed to the fact that larger discrepancies observed between experimental data and model predictions
of the last point can increase the weights of likelihood functions. This further implies that several critical points
can represent the entire line for point estimation. This paper can provide a reference both for modelers about
reasonable utilization of species time-histories, and for experimentalists about the importance of a detailed
probability distribution of measurement error, as well as experiment design with emphasis on critical points.

Keywords: Optimization; Bayesian approach; Species time-histories; Uncertainty quantification; Neural network

______________________________________________________________

*Corresponding author: silideng@mit.edu

1

1. Introduction
2. Methodology
Although direct measurement and quantum
computation have been widely used to determine
reaction rate constants in kinetic models, many rate
parameters are still estimated from a system level
against experimental measurements, such as laminar
flame speeds, ignition delay times, etc. In 2009,
Davidson and Hanson have made the multispecies
time-histories data available [1], which can provide
rich kinetic information and hence are highly suitable
for parameter estimation and model optimization.
Many tools have been developed for the
determination and optimization of kinetic parameters.
Frenklach and his coworkers [2] developed the
solution mapping method, in which a weighted-leastsquares objective function is minimized. Sheen and
Wang [3] developed the Method of Uncertainty
Minimization using Polynomial Chaos Expansions
(MUM-PCE), which can propagate the uncertainty of
experiments to the that of rate parameters with
relatively small computational costs. Turányi et al. [4]
proposed a new optimization method to integrate both
indirect and direct measurements. Recently, the
Bayesian approach has attracted much attention in
combustion community [5, 6], which provides a
probabilistic approach to quantify the uncertainty of
parameters from both prior knowledge and
experimental data. However, the computational cost
of it (usually involves applying the Markov chain
Monte Carlo algorithm) is generally large, so the
application of Bayesian approach usually relies on
creating response surfaces, which map the model
parameters to predictions. It is noteworthy that the
MUM-PCE is also a special case of Bayesian
approach with simplifications [5].
In this work, we focus on two problems in the
utilization of species time-histories in shock tubes for
kinetic model optimization by Bayesian approaches.
The first problem lies in the target selection:
representative points on the species time-history curve
[7, 8] or the entire curve [9, 10]. Both methods have
been widely adopted by modelers, and yet, there is no
comparison of the approaches in the literature on their
influences on kinetic parameter estimation. The
second problem is how to balance the information
from the prior knowledge and new measurements.
Specifically, how to determine the weights of the
likelihood of different data points, indicated by the
number of effective independent data adopted in the
Bayesian approach.
Therefore, we conducted kinetic model
optimization by Bayesian approach facilitated by
adopting neural networks as response surfaces. For
demonstration, we will not fully solve the Bayesian
equation but obtain the optimal parameters by
maximum a posterior (MAP) estimation. The
elucidated influences of the target selection and
number of independent effective data will guide
experimentalists and modelers in generating and
adopting data for model development.

To investigate the influence of target selection on
kinetic model optimization, we combined neural
networks and maximum a posteriori (MAP)
estimation to optimize a propane pyrolysis mechanism
against species histories in shock tube measurements
[11]. The trial mechanism is a C3 sub-mechanism
extracted from USC-Mech II [12] with 111 elementary
reactions and 27 species; Cantera’s format of the submechanism is available in the Supplementary
Materials. In the shock tube experiments previously
reported in [11], the time-histories of mole fraction for
eight species across five initial temperatures were
reported. There are 160 data points in each profile,
from 0.01 ms to 1.6 ms with an interval of 10 μs. The
initial gas composition is 2% propane in argon. The
thermodynamic conditions are initial temperatures of
1250 K, 1290 K, 1330 K, 1370 K, and 1410 K,
respectively, at a constant pressure of 4 atm. The
average experimental uncertainties (one standard
deviation, σ) of mole fraction for each species are
0.0027 for H2, 0.0012 for C2H2, 0.0011 for CH4,
0.0013 for C2H4, 0.0012 for C2H6, 0.0011 for pC3H4,
0.0016 for C3H6, and 0.0015 for C3H8.
The optimization process includes two steps: first,
a neural network response surface model representing
the response of species evolution to the perturbation
of pre-exponential factors was trained; then, the
Bayesian approach was employed with the previous
neural networks to optimize the kinetic parameters.

2.1 Bayesian approach
optimization

for

mechanism

Bayesian approaches has been extensively adopted
to optimize kinetic mechanisms against experimental
data [5, 6]. The core is the Bayes’ theorem,
𝑓(𝑘 ∣ 𝑑) =

𝑓(𝑑∣𝑘)𝑔(𝑘)
∫𝐾 𝑓(𝑑∣𝑘′)𝑔(𝑘′)𝑑𝑘′

,

(1)

where f(d|k) is the likelihood of d calculated by the
model with parameter k, g(k) is the prior distribution
of the model parameter based on previous experience
and knowledge, and K is the domain of g(k). The
optimal model parameter k* based on the observed
value d is the k that can make f(k|d), the posterior
distribution, reach its maximum value. In previous
works [5, 6], numerical sampling and integration
algorithms, such as Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC), were often utilized to solve the posterior
distribution and obtain the optimal parameters. To
focus on the discussion of the influence of calibration
target selection rather than conduct a comprehensive
uncertainty quantification, we only focused on finding
the optimal parameters corresponding to the
maximum value of the posterior distribution. Since the

2

3.2. Another approach is to assume the effective
number of independent data points is 1 in each species
profile, similar to the approach described in [4], which
averages the discrepancies of all data points in one
profile. In the current study, optimizations with both n
= 1 and n = 160 are conducted and compared. The
setting of effective independent-data number is
adopted from [14]. In fact, moving n into the
denominator part as N/n, and merging with εi, different
choice of n can be interpreted as different
experimental uncertainties.
For target selection, it is also a common practice to
select one or several points along the time-histories of
shock tube species measurements as optimization
targets. To demonstrate this approach, the last points
(at 1.6 ms) in every profile were selected as targets.
The loss function is

denominator in Eq. (1) is independent of k, we only
need to maximize f(d|k)g(k) and the corresponding k
is the optimal value. This approach is called maximum
a posteriori (MAP) estimation [13].
For demonstration, we focused on the preexponential factors in each elementary reaction and
left the other parameters in the kinetic mechanism,
such as temperature exponents and activation energies,
unchanged. The prior distributions of pre-exponential
factors ki are parameterized as [3]:
𝑥𝑗 =

ln⁡(𝑘𝑗 /𝑘𝑗,0 )
ln⁡ 𝑓𝑗

⁡,

(2)

where kj,0 is the nominal (unperturbed) value in the
mechanism, of the pre-exponential factor for jth
elementary reaction, fj is the uncertainty factors for jth
elementary reaction [3], and xj is subject to the normal
distribution with an expectation of 0 and a variance of
0.25. Generally, it is assumed that the prior
distribution of kj is mutually independent [3]. As for
the f(d|k), namely the likelihood function, we assumed
that it is a normal distribution with an expectation of
c0 and a variance of ε 2, where c0 is the species
concentration at a given time calculated from the
model with parameter k, and ε is the experimental
uncertainty of species concentration.
Due to the independent prior distribution, g(k) for
the entire kinetic model can be evaluated as 𝑔(𝒌) =
∏ 𝑔(𝑘), since they are independent of each other. As
for f(d|k) with multiple experimental data, a common
approach [5, 6] is to multiply f(d|k) for each data point
together, i.e., f(d|k) = ∏ 𝑓(𝑑|𝒌) . To facilitate
optimization, we constructed a loss function by taking
the natural logarithm of f(d|k)g(k), cancelling the
constant term, and taking the negative of the result:
𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠 = ∑𝑆 {

1

2𝜀𝑖2

𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠 = ∑𝑆 {

1

2𝜀𝑖2

∑𝑇(𝑐𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑,1.6 − 𝑐𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒,1.6 )2 } +
∑𝑗 2𝑥𝑗2 (4)

Similarly, here we assumed that the likelihood
functions for each temperature and species are
mutually independent.
Due to the nonlinear response of the species
profiles and the loss function to the kinetic parameters,
convex optimization algorithms are usually inefficient
and suffer from local minima traps. Instead, we
adopted stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm,
developed to optimize large-scale deep neural
networks, to find the minimum value of loss function
and the optimal model parameters.
𝑘 ∗ = arg min 𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠

(5)

𝑘

𝑛

∑𝑇 [ ∑𝑁(𝑐𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 − 𝑐𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒 )2 ]} +

Since we have replaced the physical model with neural
networks, the gradients information used in the
optimization process can be efficiently computed by
backpropagation of neural networks, rather than
solving the computationally expensive sensitivity
equations. The iteration times of all three optimization
strategies are 200, where the curve of the loss function
enters a near-plateau region. The figures of loss
function versus iteration times in three cases are
shown in Sec. 1 of the Supplementary Materials.

𝑁

∑𝑗 2𝑥𝑗2 (3)
Here, N = 160 is the number of data points in a curve,
T is the number of temperatures, S is the number of
species, and cpred and cmeasure are the mole fractions
predicted by the model and of shock tube
measurement, respectively. To reduce the
computational cost, cpred is calculated by neural
networks. εi is the experimental uncertainty for species
i, and j is the number of pre-exponential factors to be
tuned. xj is defined by Eq. (2). n is the number of
effective independent-data points, which should be the
same as N, if we take the common approach to
calculate f(d|k) with multiple experimental data, i.e.,
multiplying them together. However, such a treatment
relies on an assumption that the experimental
uncertainty of each data point is mutually independent.
This assumption is theoretically and practically
problematic when time-histories of shock tubes are
used as targets, and we will discuss this in detail in Sec.

2.2 Neural networks as response surfaces
Due to the high computational cost of Bayesian
approaches in mechanism optimization, its
implementation usually relies on response surfaces, or
surrogate models, which can relate model parameters
to the model prediction. Response surfaces that are
commonly used in the combustion community include
polynomial chaos expansion [3] and neural networks
[6]. Here, we trained neural networks as response

3

surfaces. The difference between our approach and
previous works on neural networks as surrogate
models is that our neural networks can represent the
mapping relationship between a group of preexponential factors and multiple output data, namely
time-histories of eight species, instead of only one
output data, such as the ignition delay times in [7]. In
other words, our neural network model is a full-field
surrogate model, rather than simply predicting a scalar
output value. Another advantage of neural networks is
that using gradient descent algorithm in MAP requires
gradient information, and the backpropagation
algorithm of neural networks can highly reduce the
cost of gradient computation.
The network structure, as shown in Fig. 1, is
inspired by the recently developed Deep Operator
Neural Network [15] that has a parameter neural
network and a coordinate neural network. The number
of neurons is labeled under each layer. The number of
neurons and layers is obtained by grid searching, i.e.,
increasing the number until its performance does not
improve. For the parameter network, the input features
are ln(ki/ki,0) for 111 elementary reactions. For the
coordinate (time) network, the input is time. The
outputs of the two networks undergo reshaping and
multiplication, and then form the prediction of species
concentration at a given time, as shown in Fig. 1. It is
worth noting that we trained different neural networks
under different initial temperatures, so temperature is
not considered as an input. The data used to train a
certain network are all under the same initial
temperature. The loss function for training is

For each network, the training data are 5000
samples with different model parameters generated by
Cantera [17] according to the experimental conditions
using the C3 sub-mechanism. The input parameters,
ln(kj/kj,0), are randomly sampled by Latin hypercube
sampling [18] with bounds of ±lnfj. The results show
that neural networks can predict the species
concentrations and the gradients of concentration to
input parameters accurately. The validation results can
be found in Sec. 2 of the Supplementary Materials,
from which we can find that the prediction error is
relatively small, compared with the experimental
uncertainty shown in the shadow region in Sec. 4 of
the Supplementary Materials. We also validate the
gradient computation of the network, as shown in Sec.
7 of Supplementary Materials.

𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠 = ∑(𝑐𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 − 𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 )2 ,

where N = 160 is the number of data points in each
profile and ε i is the experimental uncertainty for
species i. For each mechanism, we have 40 profiles
(eight species at five temperatures) to compare with,
so we can calculate the average of 40 NEs as an overall
measurement of the performance of this approach. In
addition, to assess the closeness between the
prediction and the measurement only at the last point
(at 1.6 ms), we can also define the normalized error at
the last point (NELP):

3 Results and discussion
3.1 Comparison of optimized mechanisms with
the original mechanism
Three approaches were utilized to optimize the trial
mechanism: the entire curve as target with averaged
errors (n = 1) and point-wise errors (n = 160), and the
last point in each profile as target. To compare the
performance of the three optimized mechanisms
against measurements, we defined a normalized error
(NE) for a given species profile:
NE =

(6)

where the summation is over all data points at a certain
temperature, including the profiles for eight species.
Adam algorithm [16] is used to minimize the loss
function till convergence. The initial point of
optimization is the parameter values in the original
mechanism, i.e., ln(ki/ki,0)=0.

1
𝑁𝜀𝑖

NELP =

∑𝑁 |𝑐𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 − 𝑐𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒 |,

1
𝜀𝑖

(7)

|𝑐𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑,1.6 − 𝑐𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒,1.6 |. (8)

We then averaged 40 NELPs together for each
mechanism. The averaged NEs and NELPs of three
optimized mechanisms and the initial mechanism are
shown in Table 1. In Table 1 and hereafter, the
mechanisms optimized against entire curves with n =
160 and n = 1 are labeled as C-160 and C-1,
respectively, and the mechanism optimized against the
last point is abbreviated as LastP. From Table 1, we
can see significantly improved agreement with the
measurements with all three optimization approaches.

Fig.1. The structure of the neural network used as surrogate
models. The number of neurons is labeled under each layer.

4

Detailed comparisons for individual temperature
and specific species measurements between the NEs
of the original mechanism and those of the three
optimized mechanism are included in Sec. 3 of the
Supplementary Materials. Regardless of the number
and choice of the target, the optimized mechanism
almost always has reduced NEs except for C2H2 and
pC3H4 under certain temperatures. A possible
explanation is that the relative experimental
uncertainties of these two species are very large. They
are nearly ten times larger than the species
concentrations themselves at 1250 K. Therefore, the
contribution of these species to the loss function is
very small, so in the optimization process, the
mechanism is tuned to fit other species at the cost of
worse predictions for these two species.

approach needs to keep a balance between f(d|k) and
g(k), which will prevent rate parameters from
deviating far away from the nominal values.
To compare the difference in rate constants of C160 and C-1, 10 most tuned elementary reactions
(measured by the absolute value of xj) in each
mechanism and the corresponding xj are shown in Fig.
2. xj can be interpreted as the normalized change of
parameters, such that an increment of 0.5 in value
corresponds to one standard deviation of the
experimental uncertainty. Although the performances
of C-1 and C-160 are similar according to Table 1,
their optimized rate constants are quite different.
Although a significant tuning in C-160 resulted in
better performance compared to C-1, it is noted that
more than 10 constants are tuned over 1σ, and one
tuned even over 3σ. This is generally considered to be
highly improbable in model development.

Table 1
Comparisons of the averaged normalized errors (NEs) and
normalized errors at the last points (NELPs).
Mechanisms
Averaged NE
Averaged NELP
Original
0.754
0.876
C-160
0.168
0.210
C-1
0.210
0.296
LastP
0.194
0.227

3.2 The influence of effective independent-data
number
The influence of effective independent-data
number will be elucidated via comparison between the
performance and optimization in model parameters of
C-160 and C-1. From Table 1, we can see that C-160
has both smaller averaged NE and averaged NELP,
implying that it performs better compared with C-1 in
terms of the closeness to experimental measurements,
although the difference is slight. In Table 2, the
differences between the NEs of C-1 and those of C160 for all 40 cases are shown, where the number
indicates the ratio of the difference to the
corresponding experimental uncertainty. In most
cases, the differences between NEs of C-160 and C-1
are less than 10% of the experimental uncertainty,
with C-160 slightly outperforming C-1. However, for
pC3H4 at 1410 K, C-1 is closer to the measurements
compared to C-160. As is mentioned above, the
relative experimental uncertainty of pC3H4 is so large
that the optimizer tends to prioritize fitting other
species, leading to larger errors in pC3H4. The
complete curves of measurements with shadows
indicating the uncertainties and predictions with C160 and C-1 are summarized in Sec. 4 of the
Supplementary Materials for visualization of this
discussion.
The reason why the overall performance of C-160
is better than C-1 is that f(d|k) in the loss function is
given a higher weight, so the prior distribution only
plays a minor role in informing the posterior
distribution. The optimizer just needs to decrease the
value of f(d|k) to make the prediction closer to
experimental measurements. On the contrary, the C-1

Fig. 2. The xj of the most tuned reaction rates in C-1 and C160.
Table 2
Differences between the NEs of C-1 and those of C-160.
Differences larger than 10% of the corresponding
experimental uncertainties are bolded.
H2
C2H2
CH4
C2H4
C2H6
pC3H4

C3H6
C3H8

1250 K

1290 K

1330 K

1370 K

1410 K

-0.018
0.001
0.164
0.077
-0.021
-3E-4
0.008
0.081

-0.003
-8E-5
0.221
0.089
0.007
-0.007
0.009
0.143

0.026
-0.002
0.170
0.025
0.072
-0.031
-0.057
0.058

0.072
-0.024
0.156
0.012
0.172
-0.070
-0.056
-0.071

0.086
-0.067
0.080
0.242
0.296
-0.118
-0.021
-0.013

To further illustrate the influence of the number of
effective independent data on the tuning of kinetic
parameters, optimizations using a sweep of n between
1 and 160 were conducted, similar to the process that
resulted in C-1 and C-160. The largest change and the
magnitude of all changes to the parameters are
presented as max |xj| and ||x||, respectively. As shown
in Table 3, when n increases, max |xj| increases
accordingly when n is beyond 10. Furthermore, the
max |xj| reaches 2σ when n is near 30, while it reaches

5

3σ when n is near 80. This demonstrates that although
including more targets could improve model
performance, over-tuning might become an issue.
A physical interpretation of cause for the overtuning problem is that the two terms in the loss
function in Eqs. (4) and (5) measure the closeness of
prediction to the experimental data and the closeness
of tuned rate parameters to the nominal value,
respectively. If we focus on tuning rate parameters to
fit experimental data, the likelihood function is given
too much weight. This approach is then similar to
maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) [13], which
totally ignores the prior distribution, instead of MAP.
Theoretically, the justification for multiplying the
likelihood function in each point together to construct
an overall likelihood function is based on the
assumption of independent likelihoods, which means
that the difference between each pair of measurement
and model prediction is independent. As mentioned in
the Introduction, this is generally adopted by previous
studies on Bayesian model calibration. However, this
is probably not true for the species histories in shock
tube measurements.

variable, rather than a random variable. The common
sources of model error in kinetic model include: (a)
missing species/reactions; (b) deviation of untuned
variable, like our case, where b-factors and activation
energies are not calibrated; (c) lumping of several
reactions, which is common in reduced mechanisms.
For systematic error, it may be subject to a
distribution, but not necessarily an i.i.d. Gaussian
distribution. One example is that, if the real
temperature behind reflected shock wave deviates
from the theoretical value, the error would be present
throughout the entire time domain, not independent
for each point. In fact, as pointed by [14], even noise
can be correlated. Consequently, in the calibration
process, in order to fit the experimental data, the
parameters would be overtuned to offset the
systematic error and model error.
Another potential reason is the ill-posedness of this
inverse problem [21], which means that the inference
results are very sensitive to the data used for inference.
In our case, the inferred parameters of C-160 and C-1
are pretty different, but the predictions of two groups
of parameters are very similar. Thus, small changes of
experimental data would lead to large changes of
inference results. One way to solve ill-posed inverse
problem is to introduce regularization of parameters
[21], which is same as imposing prior information.
Gaussian prior is equivalent to l2 regularization [22],
as shown in Eq. (3).
In Bayesian analysis against batch-wise data, such
as laminar flame speed and ignition delay time [5, 6],
the drawback of such a mis-specification is not
obvious, because the experimental data are not too
many. But in high-resolution data, such as spatial
distribution and time-series, the draw back becomes
obvious, and has great impact on the estimated
parameters. Therefore, special attention needs to be
paid to determine the number of effective independent
data, n. The potential solution for determining a
suitable n could be: (a) plotting a curve of prediction
error versus n, and select n based on the acceptable
error; (b) treating n as a parameter to be calibrated, like
[5]; (c) using the model comparison method described
in [5] to compute the evidence function with different
n, where the one with largest evidence would be the
optimal one. Here we only implement (a) for
demonstration. In Fig. S16, it is obvious that when the
averaged NE is smaller than 0.2, further increase of n
only leads to slightly improvement of performance, so
the optimal n would be around 1.
There are two noteworthy points. First, we only
show the point estimation here (MAP), without
sampling the posterior distribution. The C-1 approach,
although can provide a more reasonable point
estimation, would have a far larger posterior
uncertainty than C-160, since n = 1 is equivalent to
multiplying the experimental uncertainty by 160. In
other words, this approach provides a reasonable point
estimation but with larger uncertainty, while C-160
approach provides a point estimation with a
concentrated posterior but deviated far away from our

Table 3
Influence of the number of effective independent data on xj.
Maximum |xj| near 2σ and 3σ are in bold.
n
1
10
30
50
80
160
max |xj|
0.77 0.76 0.96 1.24 1.49 1.77
||x||
0.92 1.31 2.17 2.69 3.20 3.96

A potential explanation of this problem is that this
approach folds systematic error and model error into
i.i.d. Gaussian distributions, so parameters are forced
to be tuned away from true value to offset the
systematic error and model error. Following [19, 20],
we can express the discrepancies between model
predictions and measurements at data point i as:
𝑦𝑖 = 𝑓𝑖 (𝜆) + 𝜀𝑚𝑖 + 𝜀𝑑𝑖 = 𝑔𝑖 + 𝜀𝑑𝑖

(9)

where 𝑦𝑖 is an experimental measurement, 𝑓𝑖 (𝜆) is the
model prediction given parameter 𝜆, 𝜀𝑚𝑖 is the model
error, 𝜀𝑑𝑖 is the measurement error, and 𝑔𝑖 is the true
process. In fact, 𝜀𝑑𝑖 can be further decomposed into
𝜀𝑠𝑖 and 𝜀𝑟𝑖 , which are systematic error and random
noise, respectively. Model error is defined as the
discrepancy between model predictions (with true
parameters) and ground truth [20]. In traditional
Bayesian inference, we assume that the model with
true parameters can predict the true process, and
measurement data is ground truth plus random noise.
Generally, modeling the random noise as i.i.d.
Gaussian distributions is a valid assumption, so in this
scenario, as more data is used, the posterior
distribution would shrink around the true parameter
values [19]. In the current case, however, we also
lump systematic error and model error into an i.i.d.
Gaussian distribution, which is intrinsically a misspecification. For model error, it is a deterministic

6

prior knowledge on the parameters. Fig. 3 shows a
schematic of the posterior distribution of two
strategies, together with the ideal case of C-160 with
perfect model and accurate likelihood. Second, the
discussion of effective independent data points is
based on a precondition that the prior distribution of
parameters is not a uniform distribution. In some
literature [5, 6], the prior distribution of rate constants
is assumed as uniform distribution, in which case
MAP can be considered as MLE with bounded
parameters. In this case, the value of effective
independent data points does not affect the
optimization result. We can consider MLE as an
asymptotic case with an effective independent-data
number approaching infinity.
The analysis above can be a reference for both
modelers and experimentalists. For modelers, they
need to consider taking measures (e.g., use small n) to
avoid overtuning, especially when reduced models are
used, which can introduce large model error, and when
high-resolution data are used. For experimentalists,
providing a detailed probability density of
experimental error, especially systematic error, would
be very helpful for model calibration. If we can know
the real distribution of total measurement error (i.e.,
accurate likelihood function), there is no need to
introduce n (given that model error is not large), and
then we can get a right point estimation with a
concentrated posterior, as shown as the ideal case in
Fig. 3.

shown in Table 4, the NEs of C-1 and LastP are similar
for all 40 cases, with half positive and half negative
results. This trend is further confirmed by species
evolution histories included in Sec. 4 of the
Supplementary Materials.
We also selected the most changed rate parameters
(measured by the absolute value of xj) in each
mechanism, and compared the xj in Fig. 4. The xj of
these reactions in the two mechanisms are very similar,
except that they have opposite signs for the Habstraction reaction generating nC3H7 (the third one
from the top). In addition, there are only two
parameters in each mechanism tuned over or near 1σ:
hydrogen abstraction generating iC3H7 and propane
synthesis by C2H5 and CH3, with all others far smaller
than 1σ. In a nutshell, the performance and updated
kinetic parameters are similar for LastP and C-1.
Table 4
Differences between the NEs of LastP and those of C-1.
Differences larger than 10% of the corresponding
experimental uncertainties are in bold.
H2
C2H2
CH4
C2H4
C2H6
pC3H4

C3H6
C3H8

Fig. 3. The schematic of posterior distribution of C-1 and C160. C-160 with perfect model and accurate likelihood
function is used as an ideal case of Bayesian inference. The
dashed vertical lines represent MAP point estimations.

1250 K

1290 K

1330 K

1370 K

1410 K

-0.042
0.001
-0.027
-0.117
-0.043
2E-5
-0.058
-0.213

0.004
-0.001
-0.036
-0.156
-0.062
0.001
0.064
-0.230

-0.084
0.002
-0.034
-0.024
-0.071
0.002
0.146
-0.011

-0.068
3E-5
-0.019
0.142
-0.073
0.002
0.145
0.111

-0.053
-0.005
0.011
0.103
-0.070
0.003
0.060
0.048

Fig. 4. The xj of top 10 highly-tuned reaction rates in C-1 and
LastP.

3.3 The influence of target selection

A potential explanation for the slightly smaller NE
and NELP for LastP is that the biggest discrepancies
between the curves of C-1/LastP and experimental
measurements usually lie in the last points. Shown in
Table 1, the averaged NELP are larger than the
averaged NE for all three mechanisms. However, the
experimental uncertainty for a certain curve is a
constant throughout the entire time domain. Thus, the
likelihood function in LastP is larger than C-1.
Similar to the discussion in Section 3.2, the increase
of likelihood function is equivalent to the increase of
n, which will weaken the constraints of the prior
distribution and make the model fit targets better.

In previous studies to develop kinetic models, two
methods were adopted to select optimization targets in
species time-histories: selecting several points in a
curve [7, 8], and using all data points in the entire
curve [9, 10]. A comparison of these two approaches
will be discussed in this section. To avoid the
influence of the effective independent-data number,
C-1 was selected to represent optimization against the
entire curve and compared with LastP.
From Table 1, we can see that LastP has both
smaller averaged NELP and averaged NE than those
of C-1, although the differences are minor. Similarly,

7

There are two implications of the observation
above. First, even keeping the effective independentdata number unchanged, different selection of targets
can also change the relative weights of prior
distributions and likelihood functions. Compared with
using the data in the entire curve and averaging by the
number of data point, using the last point can increase
the weight of likelihood functions. We also can
conjecture that compared with selecting another point
in a species evolution curve, where the discrepancy is
usually smaller than the last point, selecting the last
point as target can increase the weight of the
likelihood function. In addition, a modeler might need
to consider the position of target points when
determining the number of effective independent data.
Second, from the perspective of mechanism
optimization (i.e., point estimation), the information
provided by a curve can be represented by several
critical points. As we mentioned before, the critical
point approach has been used by many previous
papers, such as [7, 8]. However, from the perspective
of uncertainty quantification, using representative
points cannot be equivalent to using all points of the
curve. For example, when n = 160, the later approach
obviously gives a narrower posterior distribution, as
discussed before, due to its amplified measurement
uncertainty. If n = 1, the difference of posterior
distributions between the critical point approach and
entire curve approach can be known by sampling the
posterior distribution, which is left for future studies.
For experimentalists, data acquisition and
measurements could focus on these critical points
(although these points might be difficult to know a
priori) for point estimation, but more data are still
valuable to narrow the estimation uncertainty.
It seems that in the current case the last point
contains almost all the information of a curve. A
natural hypothesis is that all points in this curve would
share similar sensitivity to a set of reactions. This is
called a universal sensitivity direction [22], where the
relative importance of the sensitive reactions remains
the same for all data points although the magnitude of
the sensitivity might change. If that holds, all points in
the data series are correlated, so that the response of
the curve can be inferred by the response of a single
point during optimization.
To test this hypothesis, we calculated the inner
product of the normalized sensitivity vectors at 1.6 ms
and that at 0.4 ms/0.8 ms/1.2 ms during the pyrolysis.
The results for the initial temperature of 1410 K case
are listed in Table 5, while the results for other
temperatures are attached in Sec. 5 of the
Supplementary Materials. We can see that under most
scenarios, the inner products of two normalized
sensitivity vectors are close to unity. This universal
sensitivity would allow representing the entire curve
with the last point. For those that are not close to unity,
we chose the one that deviated the most for further
discussion, which is pC3H4. We plot the normalized
sensitivity vector of pC3H4 at 0.4 ms and 1.6 ms in Fig.
5. Although the normalized sensitivities to most

reactions are similar, there are still some reactions
with much difference, such as C2H5 + CH3 (+M) →
C3H8 (+M) and C2H2 + CH3 → H + pC3H4. Thus, the
universal sensitivity direction does not hold, at least
for pC3H4 under 1410 K. This is similar to Fig. 8 of
[11], where the ratio of the sensitivities to any two
reactions is not a constant as time evolves, since
different reactions play the dominate role at different
stages. It may be due to the large experimental
uncertainties of pC3H4, so that the lack of universal
sensitivity direction does not affect the optimization
results. Thus, it is still an open question that how much
information of a species evolution curve can be
represented by a single point.
Table 5
Inner product of the normalized sensitivity vectors at 1.6 ms
and at 0.4 ms/0.8 ms/1.2 ms. Values below 0.9 are in bold.
0.4 ms
0.8 ms
1.2 ms
H2
0.921
0.970
1.000
C2H2
0.945
0.985
1.000
CH4
0.936
0.985
1.000
C2H4
0.925
0.984
1.000
C2H6
0.892
0.975
1.000
pC3H4
0.850
0.960
1.000
C3H6
0.921
0.970
1.000
C3H8
0.945
0.985
1.000

Fig. 5. Top 10 sensitivity coefficients of pC3H4 concentration
at 1.6 ms and 0.4 ms.

It is noteworthy that in our pyrolysis case the shape
of curve is monotonic or even near-linear for some
temperatures and species, so maybe one point can
represent the entire curve. In other cases, such as
autoignition, the shape of curves could be more
complex and the sensitivity direction changes with
time significantly, such that multiple points are needed.

4 Conclusion
We investigated the influences of the effective
independent-data number and selection of targets on
the Bayesian optimization of chemical models based
on species time-histories measured in shock tubes.
Neural networks are trained as response surfaces and
maximum a posterior estimation is used to obtain the
optimal parameters. Three optimization strategies
were used: using the entire species time-history curve
with an effective independent-data number of 1 (C-1)
and 160 (C-160), and using the last point of each curve

8

(LastP). It is shown that all three optimized models fit
measurements better compared to the original one.
Comparing C-1 with C-160, increasing the number
of targets results in slight improvement in predicting
the measurements by increasing the weight of the
likelihood function; however, the constraints of the
prior distribution might be weakened and may lead to
overtuning of parameters beyond common practice.
Therefore, for modelers, the number of effective
independent data should be examined carefully when
utilizing Bayesian approaches for optimizing
chemical models. For experimentalists, the detailed
probability distribution of measurement error will be
extremely valuable.
Comparing C-1 with LastP, LastP has similar and
even slightly better agreement with the measurements.
Using only the last point increases the weight of the
likelihood functions, but no overtuning was observed.
An implication is that several critical points could be
enough for point estimation, suggesting that priority
should be given to these critical points in handling data
in modeling and acquiring samples in experiments.
For the reduction of estimation uncertainty, more data
are still useful.
In the future, we will combine neural networks with
the MCMC algorithm to compute the full posterior
uncertainty of the estimated kinetic parameters to
further investigate the questions arise from this work.

[5] K. Braman, T.A. Oliver, V. Raman, Bayesian analysis of
syngas chemistry models, Combust. Theory Modell.
17(2013) 858-887.
[6] J. Wang, Z. Zhou, K. Lin, C.K. Law, B. Yang,
Facilitating Bayesian analysis of combustion kinetic
models with artificial neural network Combust. Flame
173 (2016) 468-482.
[7] S. Banerjee, R. Tangko, D.A. Sheen, H. Wang, C.T.
Bowman, An experimental and kinetic modeling study
of n-dodecane pyrolysis and oxidation, Combust. Flame
163 (2016) 12-30.
[8] D.A. Sheen, H. Wang, Combustion kinetic modeling
using multispecies time-histories in shock-tube
oxidation of heptane, Combust. Flame 158 (2011) 645656.
[9] C. Olm, T. Varga, É. Valkó, H.J. Curran, T. Turányi,
Uncertainty quantification of a newly optimized
methanol and formaldehyde combustion mechanism,
Combust. Flame 186 (2017) 45-64.
[10] T. Varga, I.G. Zsély, T. Turányi, T. Bentz, M. Olzmann,
Kinetic analysis of ethyl iodide pyrolysis based on shock
tube measurements, Int. J. Chem. Kinet. 46 (2014) 295304.
[11] S.J. Cassady, R. Choudhary, V. Boddapati, N.H.
Pinkowski, D.F. Davidson, R.K. Hanson, The pyrolysis
of propane, Int. J. Chem. Kinet. 52 (2020) 725-738.
[12] H. Wang, X. You, A.V. Joshi, S.G. Davis, A. Laskin, F.
Egolfopoulos, C.K. Law, USC Mech Version II. HighTemperature Combustion Reaction Model of
H2/CO/C1-C4
Compounds.
http://ignis.usc.edu/USC_Mech_II.htm
[13] D.P. Bertsekas, J.N. Tsitsiklis, Introduction to
probability, Athena Scientinis, 2000.
[14] S. Wang, Y. Ding, R.K. Hanson, Information-Driven
Design for Shock Tube/Laser Absorption Studies of
Fundamental Rate Constants in Combustion, with
Application to Methanol Pyrolysis, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1911.02009 (2019).
[15] L. Lu, P. Jin, G. Pang, Z. Zhang, G.E. Karniadakis,
Learning nonlinear operators via DeepONet based on the
universal approximation theorem of operators, Nat.
Mach. Intell. 3 (2021) 218-229.
[16] D. Kingma, J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization, Proceedings of the 3rd International
Conference for Learning Representations (2015).
[17] D. G. Goodwin, R. L. Speth, H. K. Moffat, B. W. Weber,
Cantera: An object-oriented software toolkit for
chemical kinetics, thermodynamics, and transport
processes, https://www.cantera.org, version 2.5.1
(2021).
[18] M.D. McKay, R.J. Beckman, W.J. Conover, A
comparison of three methods for selecting values of
input variables in the analysis of output from a computer
code, Technometrics 42 (2000) 55-61.
[19] K. Sargsyan, H.N. Najm, R. Ghanem, On the statistical
calibration of physical models, Int. J. Chem. Kint. 47
(2015) 246-276.
[20] M.C. Kennedy, A. O’Hagan, Bayesian calibration of
computer models, J. R. Statist. Soc. B 63 (2001) 425-464

Acknowledgements
HC, WJ and SD acknowledge the support from
Weichai Holding Group Co., Ltd. HC acknowledges
the helpful discussion with Prof. Peng Zhao at the
University of Tennessee, Prof. Liming Cai at Tongji
University, and Dr. Qiaofeng Li at MIT. The authors
also express gratitude to reviewers of this paper for the
improvement of the manuscript.

Supplementary material
SuppMat.doc and MechII_C3.yaml are attached.

References
[1] D.F. Davidson, R. K. Hanson, Recent advances in shock
tube/laser diagnostic methods for improved chemical
kinetics measurements, Shock Waves 19 (2009) 271-283.
[2] M. Frenklach, Systematic optimization of a detailed
kinetic model using a methane ignition example,
Combust. Flame 58 (1984) 69-72.
[3] D.A. Sheen, X. You, H. Wang, T. Løvås, Spectral
uncertainty quantification, propagation and optimization
of a detailed kinetic model for ethylene combustion,
Proc. Combust. Inst. 32 (2009) 535-542.
[4] T. Turányi, T. Nagy, I.G. Zsély, M. Cserháti, T. Varga,
B.T. Szabó, I. Sedyo, P.T. Kiss, A. Zempleni, H.J.
Curran, Determination of rate parameters based on both
direct and indirect measurements, Int. J. Chem. Kinet. 44
(2012) 284-302.

9

[21]J. Adler, O. Öktem, Solving ill-posed inverse problems
using iterative deep neural networks, Inverse Probl. 33
(2017) 124007.
[22]K.P. Murphy, Machine learning: a probabilistic
perspective, MIT press, 2012.
[23] W. Ji, T. Yang, Z. Ren, S. Deng, Dependence of kinetic
sensitivity direction in premixed flames, Combust.
Flame 220 (2020) 16-22.

10

