Uncertainty Propagation in Deep Neural Network Using Active Subspace
Weiqi Ji a, Zhuyin Ren a and Chung K. Law a,b
a Tsinghua University, Beijing, China b Princeton University, NJ, USA

weiqiji@mit.edu (W. Ji), zhuyinren@tsinghua.edu.cn (Z. Ren),
cklaw@princeton.edu (C. K. Law)
Abstract
The inputs of deep neural network (DNN) from real-world data usually come with
uncertainties. Yet, it is challenging to propagate the uncertainty in the input features to the
DNN predictions at a low computational cost. This work employs a gradient-based
subspace method and response surface technique to accelerate the uncertainty propagation
in DNN. Specifically, the active subspace method is employed to identify the most
important subspace in the input features using the gradient of the DNN output to the inputs.
Then the response surface within that low-dimensional subspace can be efficiently built,
and the uncertainty of the prediction can be acquired by evaluating the computationally
cheap response surface instead of the DNN models. In addition, the subspace can help
explain the adversarial examples. The approach is demonstrated in MNIST datasets with a
convolutional neural network. Code is available at: https://github.com/jiweiqi/nnsubspace.
Keywords: Deep learning, Uncertainty quantification, Adversarial examples, Active
subspace, Gaussian noise
1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated impressive performance over the
years in many fields of research. The applications include object classification (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever and Hinton 2012; He et al. 2016), semantic segmentation (Long, Shelhamer and
Darrell 2015), activity recognition/detection (Tran et al. 2015) and speech recognition
(Hinton et al. 2012) to name a few. Despite these successes, DNNs prove to be not very
robust to noise in the input (Tang and Eliasmisth 2010). Recent works on adversarial
perturbations (Szegedy et al. 2013) clearly show that small imperceptible perturbations to
the input can result in a drastic negative effect on classification performance. Real world
data come with uncertainties and quantifying the effect of input noise to DNN predictions
becomes vital for those safety-critical systems such as autonomous driving (Gal and
Ghahramani 2016). On the other hand, training networks with random noise applied to
their inputs can enhance the robustness of networks (Sietsma and Dow 1991). Therefore,
understanding the response of the network output to the input noise is also useful for
training the network, and provides insight on searching adversarial examples (Goodfellow,
Shlens and Szegedy 2014).

Thus, in this work, we introduce the active subspace method (Constantine, Dow and
Wang 2014) to identify the low-dimensional subspace from the high-dimensional input
features in DNN. Along the active subspace, the perturbation of the inputs substantially
changes the output while the perturbation in the complementary subspace has little effect
on the output. The active subspace can be identified via the gradient of DNN output w.r.t.
the inputs, which can be evaluated efficiently via backpropagation. We shall show that one
or two-dimensional active subspace can reasonably capture most of the variations of the
output in the MNIST dataset under a moderate level of perturbation. Then the uncertainty
of the output can be efficiently estimated with few samples through building lowdimensional response surface against the active subspace.
2. Related Work
Monte Carlo (MC) sampling is the most straightforward approach that can be used to
calculate the uncertainty of the output. It is based on randomly drawing a number of
samples from the inputs distribution and then feed those samples to the network. The
probabilistic density function, as well as the first and second moment of the output, can be
estimated through those predictions. However, MC requires a large number of samples due
to its slow convergence rate.
Several approaches have been proposed to estimate the uncertainty of output efficiently,
and they can be divided into two categories. One is layer-wise uncertainty propagation
(Bibi, Alfadly and Ghanem 2018; Astudillo and Neto 2011) and the other one is using
Unscented Transform (Simon and Uhlmann 1997; Abdelaziz et al. 2015). In the layer-wise
approach, the first and second moment of a single layer’s output is analytically expressed
as the layer inputs uncertainty under certain assumptions and then the uncertainty of the
input is propagated to the final output layer-by-layer. However, the performance degrades
when the network is deep as the error accumulates through layers. The Unscented
Transform is based on the Unscented Kalman Filter (Simon and Uhlmann 1997), which
assumes that the output follows a Gaussian distribution and its first and second moment
can be accurately estimated via a series of weighted deterministic samples. However, the
Unscented Transform requires 2𝑑 + 1 samples where 𝑑 is the dimension of the input
features. The computational cost could be significant for DNN with high-dimensional input
features.
3. Approach
We denote the input vector as x following the probabilistic distribution of 𝜋x . The
deterministic DNN maps the inputs to output and is denoted as 𝑓(𝐱). The active subspace
(AS) methodology is detailed in (Constantine, Dow and Wang 2014) with algorithms, a
rigorous error analysis, and demonstrations. It has been applied to various engineering field
in the context of forward uncertainty propagation (Constantine et al. 2015; Ji et al. 2018)

and Bayesian inference (Constantine, Kent and Bui-Thanh 2016). Here we simply state the
basic concepts. The AS method seeks an r-dimensional subspace in the d-dimensional input
feature space that describes most of the variation of 𝑓(𝐱). The idea is to find a lowdimensional approximation of 𝑓(𝐱) as
𝑓(𝐱) ≈ 𝑔(𝐱 𝑟 ), 𝐱 𝑟 = 𝑺𝑇 𝐱,

(1)

where 𝑔 is a function of the r-dimensional input 𝐱𝑟 with 𝑟 < 𝑑, and 𝑆 is an orthogonal
matrix of size 𝑑×𝑟. The active subspace is defined as span{S}. One way to identify the
active subspace is to perform an eigenvalue decomposition of the matrix C, defined as the
expectation of the outer product of the gradient ∇𝑓 with itself, i.e.,
𝑪 = ∫ ∇𝑓(𝐱)∇𝑓(𝐱)𝑇 πx (𝐱)d𝐱 = 𝑾𝜦𝑾𝑻 .

(2)

Note that C is symmetric, positive semi-definite, and of size 𝑑×d. The unitary matrix 𝑾
consists of the d eigenvectors 𝐰1 , … , 𝐰𝑑 and 𝚲 is a diagonal matrix whose components are
the eigenvalues 𝜆1,… 𝜆d, sorted in descending order. If there is a gap in the eigenvalues,
meaning λ𝑟 ≫ λ𝑟+1, then the function 𝑓 varies mostly along the first r eigenvectors and is
almost constant along the rest of the eigenvectors. The first r eigenvectors are selected as
active directions, i.e., 𝑺 ≡ [𝐰1 , … , 𝐰𝑟 ] ; and its complement 𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑛{𝐰𝒓+𝟏 , … , 𝐰𝑑 } is
identified as the inactive subspace. Then one can build a response surface, 𝑅𝑆(𝐱 𝑟 ), with 𝐱𝑟
as input, and it is chosen as the function 𝑔, i.e.,
𝑓(𝐱) ≈ 𝑔(𝐱 𝑟 ) = 𝑅𝑆(𝐱 𝑟 ).

(3)

The matrix C can be approximated by MC simulations. The number of gradient evaluations
of the forward model, M, variable increases logarithmically with d, i.e.,
𝑀 = 𝛼𝛽log(𝑑).

(4)

The constant 𝛼 is the over-sampling factor and is recommended to be between 2 and 10,
and 𝛽 should be larger than 𝑟 + 1.
Once the active subspace is identified, various response techniques, such as Polynomial
Fitting and Polynomial Chaos Expansion (PCE) (Conrad and Marzouk 2013) can be readily
applied to the low-dimensional active subspace. The entire workflow for propagating the
input uncertainty to the DNN output will be:
(I) Estimate the active subspace based on a small number, M, of samples drawn from πx ,
and evaluate the gradient of 𝑓(𝐱) for each sample.
(II) Build the response surface 𝑅𝑆(𝐱 𝑟 ) to the low-dimensional variable 𝐱𝑟.
(III) Estimate the distribution of the DNN output by evaluating a large number of samples
drawn from πx with 𝑓(𝐱) being approximated by the cheap response surface 𝑅𝑆(𝐱 𝑟 ).

4. Experimental Result
In this section, we apply the active subspace method to the MNIST handwritten digital
data (LeCun 1998). A (convolutional neural network) CNN, similar to LeNet (LeCun et al.
1998), with four hidden layers was trained on 60000 images to the accuracy of 99.28%,
and the test accuracy of 98.86% on another 10000 test images. Dropout is applied for the
regularization and the activation function of softplus instead of ReLU is implemented such
that the DNN output is mathematically differentiable w.r.t the input features. The
uncertainty of the image follows Gaussian distribution, which is centered at the original
image with a constant variance for all of the pixel values. The uncertainty of each pixel
value is independent with each other. For instance, the variance of the input feature vector
x can be written as σ2 𝐼784, in which x corresponds to the flatten vector of the image matrix,
and I is the identity matrix of size 784 × 784. We denoted the additive Gaussian noise as
𝝃, then we have
𝐱 = 𝐱 0 + σ𝝃

(3)

in which 𝝃 follows a standard Gaussian distribution, i.e., 𝛏 ~ 𝑁 (𝟎, 𝐼784 ). Noting that the
distribution of the added noise is truncated to ensure the pixel value to be within [0, 255].
The output, corresponds to the predicted label of the original picture, is specified as the
quantity of interest, although the predicted label might change after adding noise to the
original picture. For example, a picture with the ground truth label of ‘6’ is classified as
‘8’, then the output corresponds to the category of ‘8’, intead of ‘6’, will be specified as
the quantity of interest. The constants of α and β in Eq. (4) are both specified as 10, and
the number of evaluations of the gradient f (x) will be 667 = 10 ∗ 10 ∗ ln(28 ∗ 28) for
each image.
Figure 1 presents the eigenvalues and the summary plot of the output against the first
active variable for an image from the test dataset, shown in Fig. 2. The first active variable
defined as the projected value of noise onto the first active direction, i.e., 𝐰1𝑇 𝛏. The
spectrum suggests a one-dimensional active subspace for the cases of σ = 20 and 30, and a
two-dimensional active subspace for the case of larger uncertainty σ = 50. The summary
plot shows that the first active variable can capture the changes of the output with the noise
input very well, although the scattering in the case of σ = 50 becomes significant. In all
three cases, the map from input features to output is close to linear with weak nonlinear
behavior, and a response surface with second order polynomial fitting is sufficient for those
cases. Finally, the uncertainty of the output is acquired by evaluating 50000 samples via
the response surface. The histogram suggest that the distribution of the output is close to
Gaussian distribution.
As the DNN output changes most along the active direction, one can make adversarial
examples by specifying the noise along the active direction. An example is shown in Fig.

2. The score of the output is significantly changed, although there is no visual difference
between the original and the perturbated image.

Figure 1. The spectrum of the eigenvalues, the summary plot against the first active
variable along with the second order polynomial fitting curve, and the histogram of the
network output based on the response surface.

+

=

𝐱
𝒘1𝑇 𝝃 = 63.75
x+𝒘1𝑇 𝝃
{‘6’: 0.69 confidence}
{‘1’: 0.19 confidence }
{‘0’: 0.89 confidence }
Figure 2. The original image (left), addictive noise along the first active direction, and the
image added with the noise. 𝐰1𝑇 corresponds to the active subspace for the case of σ = 20.
Finally, the accuracy of the computed output uncertainty through one-dimensional
active subspace and second-order polynomial fitting is validated against MC sampling.
Figure 3 shows the conditional plot of the standard deviations of the DNN output against
its mean from 1000 test images. For each image, we use 50000 samples for the Monte
Carlo integration, and the uncertainty of the input is specified as σ = 20. As expected, the
uncertainty of the output is very small when the highest score of the prediction is close to
100%. Therefore, we shall focus on the images whose highest score is less than 0.9. Figure
4 presents the results from active subspace with response surface and the direct MC. In all
three cases, the mean and the variance of the DNN output agree with MC very well.
Assuming that the computational cost of the gradient evaluation is the same as the forward
prediction of DNN and ignoring the cost of building response surface, the total cost of the
current approach is lower than that of direct MC by two magnitudes.

Figure 3. The conditional plot of the standard deviations of the output against its mean.
The statistics of the output is acquired via direct Monte Carlo sampling with 50000 samples
for each image under σ = 20.

Figure 4. The mean and standard deviation of the output acquired via response surface (rs
mean & std) against the ones from direct Monte Carlo sampling (mc mean & std).
5. Discussion
The current work shows that there exist one-dimensional active subspace from the map
of the network inputs to the output for most of the test images under a moderate level of
uncertainty, although some images show two-dimensional active subspace. Furthermore,
the map between the output and inputs is close to linear for most of the images especially
when the variance of the input uncertainty is small. These observations justify the argument
made by (Goodfellow, Shlens and Szegedy 2014), that the linear nature of DNN w.r.t the
perturbations to inputs can explain the adversarial examples rather than the nonlinear

response. Regarding the cases where the active subspace is higher than one-dimension or
the response of the output is nonlinear, the summary plot against the one and twodimensional active subspace enable us to visualize the response of the output to the
perturbations.
The number of gradient evaluations specified in the current work is very conservative,
and it can be further reduced to facilitate the efficiency requirement of real-time prediction,
such as the perception and end-to-end control in autonomous driving.
As a byproduct, the active subspace also reveals the global sensitivity of the output to
the inputs (Constantine and Diaz 2017), i.e., large components of the active direction
corresponds to the influential features. This opens the possibility of developing subspace
based metrics for attributing the prediction of DNN to its input features (Sundararajan, Taly
and Yan 2017).
In the future, we shall apply the approach to more complex datasets, such as ImageNet
(Deng et al. 2009), with much deeper networks, such as ResNet (He et al. 2016) and
DenseNet (Huang et al. 2017). As the number of evaluations of gradients increases
logarithmically with the dimension of inputs, the active subspace can also be applied to the
uncertainty in the model parameters with hundreds of gradient evaluation. For example,
ResNet50 contains about 2.5 × 107 model parameters, the number of gradient evaluation
with both α and β set as 5 will be 425. Although Monte Carlo dropout (Gal and Ghahramani
2016) is widely adopted for propagating the uncertainties in the network parameters to the
network output, it assumes that the uncertainty of the model parameters follows a Bernoulli
distribution. The approach presented in the current work is suitable for more complex
distributions in the model parameters.
6. Conclusion
In this work, the active subspace is applied to identify the low-dimensional subspace
in the map from the input features to the network output. With backpropagation, the active
subspace can be identified with hundreds of gradient evaluations. One dimensional active
subspace and linear response are observed for most of the test images under a moderate
level of perturbations to the inputs, although two-dimensional active subspace and nonlinear response are also observed for large input uncertainties. Those findings are useful
for the explanations and searching of adversarial examples. In conjunction with response
surface methodology, the statistics of the DNN output can also be efficiently acquired, and
the computational cost is less than the direct Monte Carlo method by two magnitudes in
the MNIST dataset.

7. Acknowledgment
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China No.
91441202.
References
[Abdelaziz et al., 2015] Abdelaziz, A.H., Watanabe, S., Hershey, J.R., Vincent, E. and
Kolossa, D., 2015, September. Uncertainty propagation through deep neural networks.
In Interspeech 2015.
[Astudillo and Neto 2011] Astudillo, R.F. and Neto, J.P.D.S., 2011. Propagation of
uncertainty through multilayer perceptrons for robust automatic speech recognition.
In Twelfth Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication Association.
[Bibi, Alfadly and Ghanem 2018] Bibi, A., Alfadly, M. and Ghanem, B., 2018. Analytic
Expressions for Probabilistic Moments of PL-DNN with Gaussian Input, In Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 9099–9107.
[Conrad and Marzouk 2013] Conrad, P.R. and Marzouk, Y.M., 2013. Adaptive Smolyak
pseudospectral approximations. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 35(6), pages
A2643-A2670.
[Constantine, Dow and Wang 2014] Constantine, P.G., Dow, E. and Wang, Q., 2014.
Active subspace methods in theory and practice: applications to kriging surfaces. SIAM
Journal on Scientific Computing, 36(4), pages A1500-A1524.
[Constantine et al. 2015] Constantine, P.G., Emory, M., Larsson, J. and Iaccarino, G., 2015.
Exploiting active subspaces to quantify uncertainty in the numerical simulation of the
HyShot II scramjet. Journal of Computational Physics, 302, pages1-20.
[Constantine and Diaz 2017.] Constantine, P.G. and Diaz, P., 2017. Global sensitivity
metrics from active subspaces. Reliability Engineering & System Safety, 162, pages1-13.
[Constantine, Kent and Bui-Thanh 2016] Constantine, P.G., Kent, C. and Bui-Thanh, T.,
2016. Accelerating Markov chain Monte Carlo with active subspaces. SIAM Journal on
Scientific Computing, 38(5), pages A2779-A2805.
[Deng et al. 2009] Deng, J., Dong, W., Socher, R., Li, L.J., Li, K. and Fei-Fei, L., 2009.
Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database.
[Gal and Ghahramani 2016] Gal, Y. and Ghahramani, Z., 2016, June. Dropout as a bayesian
approximation: Representing model uncertainty in deep learning. In international
conference on machine learning, pages 1050-1059.

[Goodfellow, Shlens and Szegedy 2014] Goodfellow, I.J., Shlens, J. and Szegedy, C., 2014.
Explaining and harnessing adversarial examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572.
[He et al. 2016] He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S. and Sun, J., 2016. Deep residual learning for
image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 770-778.
[Hinton et al. 2012] Hinton, G., Deng, L., Yu, D., Dahl, G., Mohamed, A.R., Jaitly, N.,
Senior, A., Vanhoucke, V., Nguyen, P., Kingsbury, B. and Sainath, T., 2012. Deep neural
networks for acoustic modeling in speech recognition. IEEE Signal processing
magazine, 29.
[Huang et al. 2017] Huang, G., Liu, Z., Van Der Maaten, L. and Weinberger, K.Q., 2017.
Densely connected convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 4700-4708.
[Ji et al., 2018] Ji, W., Wang, J., Zahm, O., Marzouk, Y.M., Yang, B., Ren, Z. and Law,
C.K., 2018. Shared low-dimensional subspaces for propagating kinetic uncertainty to
multiple outputs. Combustion and Flame, 190, pages146-157.
[Krizhevsky, Sutskever and Hinton 2012] Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I. and Hinton, G.E.,
2012. Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks. In Advances in
neural information processing systems, pages 1097-1105.
[LeCun 1998] LeCun, Y., 1998. The MNIST database of handwritten digits. http://yann.
lecun. com/exdb/mnist/.
[LeCun et al. 1998] LeCun, Y., Bottou, L., Bengio, Y. and Haffner, P., 1998. Gradientbased learning applied to document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11), pages
2278-2324.
[Long, Shelhamer and Darrell 2015] Long, J., Shelhamer, E. and Darrell, T., 2015. Fully
convolutional networks for semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 3431-3440.
[Sundararajan, Taly and Yan 2017] Sundararajan, M., Taly, A. and Yan, Q., 2017, August.
Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In Proceedings of the 34th International
Conference on Machine Learning-Volume 70 pages 3319-3328.
[Sietsma and Dow 1991] Sietsma, J. and Dow, R. J. F., 1991, Creating artificial neural
networks that generalize, Neural Networks, 4(1), pages 67–79.
[Simon and Uhlmann 1997] Simon J, J. and Uhlmann K., J., 1997, A New Extention of the
Kalman Filter to Nonlinear Systems, AeroSense’97. International Society for Optics and
Photonics, pages 182–193.

[Szegedy et al. 2013] Szegedy, C., Zaremba, W., Sutskever, I., Bruna, J., Erhan, D.,
Goodfellow, I. and Fergus, R., 2013. Intriguing properties of neural networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1312.6199.
[Tran et al. 2015] Tran, D., Bourdev, L., Fergus, R., Torresani, L. and Paluri, M., 2015.
Learning spatiotemporal features with 3d convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the
IEEE international conference on computer vision, pages 4489-4497.

