Kinetic Subspace Investigation Using Neural Network for
Uncertainty Quantification in Nonpremixed Flamelets
Benjamin C. Koeniga , Weiqi Jia , Sili Denga,∗
a Department of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

Abstract
Propagating uncertainties in kinetic models through turbulent combustion simulations to properly quantify the
uncertainties in the simulation results remains a challenging and numerically expensive problem. Efficient approaches have been proposed for certain flames in the flamelet region by reducing their uncertainty input from a
high-dimensional kinetic parameter space to a one-dimensional variable. However, this one-dimensional assumption does not apply to all flamelet regimes. In the current work, we developed a systematic approach to discover
low-dimensional active subspace reductions that apply to the entire mixture fraction space of the flamelet, and
that function even in cases where the uncertainty response is not uniform across the entire solution domain and
the one-dimensional assumption does not apply. In doing so, we are able to achieve uncertainty quantification
with a tunable tradeoff between high accuracy and low computational cost through careful selection of subspace
dimensionality. We facilitated computation in this method using a specifically designed deep neural network
based surrogate model to compute the temperature gradients of the flamelet profile to the kinetic parameters. We
presented, as a proof-of-concept, a two-stage active subspace reduction on the kinetic parameter space of a nonpremixed methane flamelet. In doing so we demonstrated that its uncertainty response cannot be represented by a
one-dimensional kinetic variable due to its uncorrelated behavior across the mixture fraction domain. We instead
proposed a four-dimensional active subspace that captures 98% of the uncertainty response in the flame profile
at largely reduced computational cost compared to the full kinetic parameter space. The tunability, generality,
and reduced computational cost of this method demonstrate its potential to facilitate uncertainty quantification of
complex and large-scale combustion problems.
Keywords: Uncertainty Quantification; Deep Neural Network; Active Subspace; Flamelet

* Corresponding Author.
E-mail Address: silideng@mit.edu (S. Deng)

1

1. Introduction

ture fractions and strained conditions, then a onedimensional active subspace could also be found for
the entire flame profile. However, validating this assumption is nontrivial. The active subspace method is
computationally cheaper than many other sensitivity
analysis-based methods, but still requires thousands
of evaluations of flamelet profile gradients with respect to the kinetic parameters to obtain good accuracy.
To evaluate the gradients of flamelet responses to
kinetic uncertainties efficiently and accurately in the
current work, we built a deep neural network surrogate model for flamelet simulation. Neural networks trained using the traditional backpropagation
algorithm [12] are capable of highly efficient gradient
computation, though are limited by their fixed grids
and struggle to adapt to training data generated using PDE solvers with adaptive mesh refinement such
as Cantera [13]. As will be discussed in Sec. 2,
our method utilized the Non-linear Independent Dual
System [14] neural network structure, which is similar to the Deep Operator Neural Network [15]. It
is able to evaluate the effects of rate constant perturbations on the temperature profiles of nonpremixed
flamelets on any arbitrary grid with a single training
cycle due to its unique structure, while maintaining
the inexpensive gradient evaluations inherent to traditional networks. With the network-supplied gradient information, we then characterized the uncertainty of the flamelet and investigated if there exists
a low-dimensional kinetic subspace that can capture
the uncertainty response of its entire mixture fraction profile with high accuracy. We did so by adapting the recently developed vector-valued active subspace method [16] and applying a two-stage singularvalue decomposition (SVD). The first SVD was to
identify local active subspaces at each fixed mixture
fraction. Then, the second SVD identified the global
kinetic subspace from the set of all local subspaces.
The terms ”local” and ”global” are used here to distinguish between a local subspace at a fixed mixture
fraction, and a global subspace applicable across the
full mixture fraction domain. Both cases are found
using the entire kinetic uncertainty space. Variable
strain rates were not considered based on previous
work suggesting that they do not greatly impact kinetic sensitivity directions [17], though verifying such
a result in this context is a focus of our future work.
We aimed to demonstrate the skill and efficiency of
this neural network surrogate model and leverage its
numerically inexpensive and discretization-agnostic
gradients to discover a low-dimensional kinetic subspace that applies across the entire mixture fraction
domain of a nonpremixed methane flamelet. This
novel and efficient approach is able to represent the
flamelet uncertainty response in greatly reduced dimensionality, even in cases where the local active subspace depends on the mixture fraction. Such a method
has potential to be scaled up and applied to facilitate
the uncertainty quantification of large eddy turbulent

Combustion simulations for practical applications
usually involve turbulent flows and hundreds of chemical species and reactions [1]. The kinetic parameters of these reactions are not precisely known, and
their uncertainties can propagate through the combustion model and result in substantial uncertainties in
the simulation results [2–5]. Uncertainty quantification, such as Monte Carlo sampling, aims to evaluate the effect of kinetic uncertainties on the simulation results [6]. However, due to the computational
cost needed to run many turbulent combustion simulations, directly propagating high-dimensional kinetic
uncertainty is not feasible [2].
In the seminal work of Mueller et al. [2], a physicsinformed dimension reduction was proposed to represent high-dimensional kinetic uncertainties in a
flamelet-based turbulent combustion model. This approach first propagates the kinetic uncertainty (about
300 dimensions for methane) onto the flamelets, then
assumes that the temperature at different mixture fractions and scalar dissipation rates are correlated with
each other such that the uncertainty across both domains can be parameterized with only one variable.
If such an assumption is universally valid, huge computational savings can be expected for kinetic uncertainty quantifications in turbulent combustion simulations in the flamelet regime.
The active subspace method [3, 7, 8] is an alternative solution to derive a low-dimensional representation to high-dimensional kinetic uncertainties. This
approach seeks to identify a low-rank kinetic subspace within which changes in the kinetic parameters have the greatest effect on the flame simulation results. Uncertainty quantification can be carried out in this subspace, instead of the full, highdimensional space, to reduce computational cost. The
eigenvalue-based decomposition used in the active
subspace method is similar to principal component
analysis (PCA) in its discovery of low-dimensional
directions in a high-dimensional space. It differs in
that PCA typically reduces the dimension of the output space itself, while the active subspace method
uses output data and gradients in order to reduce the
dimension of the input space [9]. A key difference
from traditional methods such as [10] in this specific
combustion case is that the active subspace method
analyzes the response across the full input uncertainty
space, not just at the nominal value. This method has
previously been successful in propagating kinetic uncertainty to the lift-off height of the Cabra flame [3].
Previous active subspace work generally examines
only a single quantity, such as liftoff height [3] [11]
or ignition delay time [11], rather than the response
of the entire temperature profile as is analyzed in
this work. It is expected that if the aforementioned
assumption of a one-dimensional flamelet response
to kinetic uncertainties is valid across different mix-

2

while xrZ is the same vector expressed with rank rZ ,
reduced in an information-preserving way using the
rZ -dimensional subspace. We identify this active subspace of dimension rZ with the eigen-decomposition
of the matrix C at the location Z, which is analogous
to the SVD of the temperature gradients.

combustion simulations through the laminar flamelet
model.
2. Methods
In this work, we investigated if a global kinetic subspace for a one-dimensional nonpremixed
methane flamelet can be constructed using the active
subspace method, facilitated by a neural network surrogate model of the flamelet. In Secs. 2.1 and 2.2, the
methodologies for propagating kinetic uncertainties
to flamelet temperature profiles and obtaining lowdimensional active subspaces are introduced. In Sec.
2.3, the structure, training, and validation of the neural network used to compute gradients for the subspace algorithm is discussed.
Throughout this work, a normalized version of the
rate constant uncertainty ranges computed in previous
work [18] is utilized,
xℓ =

ln kℓ /kℓ,0
∼ N (0, 1),
1
ln uℓ
3

M

C=

= WΛWT .

(1)

2.1. Local Active Subspace at Fixed Mixture Fraction
The general algorithm, methodology, and proofs
for the active subspace method are presented in [7].
The following will present a basic overview of the
concepts specific to our applications.
The one-dimensional flame is solved in the physical space instead of the mixture fraction space. The
mixture fraction used throughout this work is then defined using the hydrogen elemental mass fraction
Wmix − Wox
,
Wfuel − Wox

(2)

2.2. Global Active Subspace Across A Flamelet
Performing this reduction at a given location Z
generates one subspace of dimension rZ . However,
the active subspace does not necessarily remain the
same or even similar at different mixture fractions,
as will be shown in Sec. 3.2. To investigate if a
global kinetic subspace across a flamelet can be constructed, we develop a second stage of SVD reduction. We assume for now (to be demonstrated as well
in Sec. 3.2) that rZ = 1 for all Z and thus the local active subspace at any given Zi is described with
the single vector w1 , which we denote wi henceforth to distinguish between local subspaces at different mixture fractions. This assumption is made here
to simplify notation but is not a prerequisite for use of

where Z is the mixture fraction at a given location,
and Wmix , Wox , and Wfuel represent the hydrogen
mass fractions of the mixture, oxidizer stream, and
fuel stream, respectively.
We aim to identify, at a given location Z, an rZ dimensional subspace in the d-dimensional kinetic
rate constant space (with rZ < d) that describes the
bulk of the variation of the flame temperature TZ at
location Z, such that
TZ (xd ) ≈ TZ (xrZ ),

(4)

Here, M is the total number of rate constant samples
j that we generate from the full rate constant uncertainty space in x, with the gradient ∇x TZ (xj ) evaluated once per iteration j. We compute these gradient
values in our specialized neural network, as detailed
in Sec. 2.3. By virtue of the network-powered gradients, we do not need to treat M with as much care as
in more computationally expensive methods, and can
simply choose a larger M if the results do not converge properly. From the decomposition WΛWT ,
we can extract d eigenvectors w1 through wd of
length d each, corresponding to d eigenvalues λ1
through λd . Due to the symmetry of C, these eigenvectors form an orthonormal basis that can be used to
fully describe any sample xd . The reduced dimension
rZ is chosen by identifying the first two eigenvalues
λr and λr+1 between which there is a substantial difference of multiple orders of magnitude. This gap informs us that the primary direction(s) of variation in
the flame temperature occur in the first r eigenvectors w1 through wr , the set of which is defined as the
active subspace. The accuracy of the reduced dimension subspace in reconstructing the matrix C and thus
capturing the gradient behavior is dictated by the percentage of the sum of all eigenvalues captured by the
sum up to the index r. We can project a given sample
xd onto this subspace in order to express it as a linear
combination of these r basis eigenvectors, reducing
the space within which we need to perturb the kinetic
model to characterize uncertainty by d − r.

where xℓ is the ℓth index of the normalized rate constant perturbation vector x, kℓ is the perturbed value
of the ℓth rate constant, kℓ,0 is the nominal value of
the ℓth rate constant, uℓ is the uncertainty factor corresponding to kℓ,0 as reported in the literature [18],
and N (0, 1) denotes the standard normal distribution
with zero mean and unit variance. This normalization
facilitates the neural network training and subspace
analysis presented below.

Z=

1 X
∇x TZ (xj )(∇x TZ (xj ))T
M j=1

(3)

where xd is a full-rank vector of rate constant perturbations for the d reactions in the kinetic model,

3

from perturbations in the full d-dimensional kinetic
space, which were compared against those simulated
using the reduced ru -dimensional kinetic subspace.
We generated, based on Eq. (1), 5,000 random perturbation vectors. To compare the subspace and full
space results, we projected these samples into the ru dimensional subspace and then reconstructed the fulldimensional samples using these projections. In doing so, we created new samples representing the same
data with greatly reduced rank that can still be used
with Cantera or the neural network:

this method, which is applicable to subspaces of arbitrary dimensions. The methodology presented below
serves to reduce the set of one-dimensional subspaces
at n mixture fractions, where n is a sampling number
larger than d, down to a final global subspace basis
of dimension ru that is applicable across the entire
mixture fraction domain.
We define A as the n × d matrix with each row i
defined by wi . It therefore contains the local active
kinetic subspaces at all n grid points in the mixture
fraction domain. The singular value decomposition
on A follows
A = USVT ,
(5)
where S is an n × d diagonal matrix with d singular
values σ that correspond to the relative importance
of the principal directions V. The squared singular values σ 2 relate to the eigenvalues of the matrix
AAT , and can be analyzed similarly to the eigendecomposition of C in Eq. (4). If we do not observe a
large gap between the first two squares of singular values, as may occur in cases where a multidimensional
subspace is necessary to fully characterize the uncertainty response, we can select our reduced dimension
ru such that the percentage of the sum of all squared
singular values represented by the sum of those from
1 to ru meets our accuracy needs. For example, if the
sum of the first three squared singular values represents 95% of the total sum, then we expect the basis
formed by the collection of principal directions up to
ru = 3 to capture 95% of the variance in matrix A,
and thus of the variance in the local subspaces. In this
way, we can tune the accuracy versus computational
cost tradeoff of the method to any specific application’s needs. After selecting ru , we obtain from V a
reduced space vk with k ranging from 1 to ru , where
the vectors v describe the same rate constant space as
the vectors w but at greatly reduced dimensionality.
While the first stage of our reduction method in Sec.
2.1 evaluated local subspaces from the corresponding temperature gradients at fixed mixture fractions,
the second stage here combines all local results to
discover a global subspace across the entire flamelet.
We emphasize that in contrast to other local subspace
analyses seen in the literature, our approach allows us
to generate not only a local reduced-dimension subspace w1 , but also a globally applicable and further
reduced subspace basis of vk . We also note that the
method is easily generalizable to universal cases with
scopes beyond this proof of concept. In this work, we
investigated the flamelet at a fixed strain rate, as previous research suggests that strain rates have minimal
effects on kinetic sensitivity directions [17]. However,
for future applications that require sampling of strain
rate or other inputs, any local subspace may be included in the A matrix and then reduced further with
Eq. (5).
To fully validate the global kinetic subspace, Cantera [13] was utilized to simulate temperature profiles

bru ,j =

ru
X

[(bd,j · vk )vk ].

(6)

k=1

Here bd,j is the jth sample in the full kinetic space
d, and bru ,j is the same sample expressed in reduced
rank using the ru basis vectors vk . This operation reduces each vector bd,j to a linear combination of the
vk basis directions. From this linear combination it
reconstructs parameter vectors of length d but rank ru
to test in Cantera using the same boundary conditions
as in the initial data generation in Sec. 2.3. This enables comparison of temperature profiles based separately on the sets of vectors bru ,j and bd,j , to evaluate how much of the original information is captured
by the ru -rank sample.
2.3. Neural Network Surrogate Model for Flamelets
Gradient computation to construct the matrix C
in Eq. (4) was performed by our specifically structured neural network. Given a rate constant perturbation vector x as defined in Eq. (1), this network
was trained to predict the full temperature response
profile of a single flamelet in the mixture fraction
space. We started by generating 5,000 nonpremixed
methane/oxygen counterflow training data sets using
the GRI-Mech 3.0 mechanism [19] with Cantera [13]
at a pressure of 1 bar, strain rate of 4600 s−1 , inlet
temperatures of 300K, and global equivalence ratio of
2, on an 18 mm wide domain in which methane enters
from one boundary and oxygen from the other. We
trained a neural network on this data with a structure
inspired by the Non-linear Independent Dual System
network [14], shown in Fig. 1. In the top (blue) parameter network depicted in Fig. 1, the jth rate constant perturbation vector xj of length d = 217 generated from Eq. (1) is fed to the 217-node input layer.
This is passed through eight layers with 16 nodes each
until it reaches the final parameter layer. Similarly,
the bottom (red) coordinate network has a one-node
input layer for the ith mixture fraction within the grid
of sample j, (Zj )i . It is passed through six layers
with 16 nodes each until it reaches the final coordinate
layer. The inner product of the two networks’ final
layers provides the scalar output temperature value
T (xj )((Zj )i ) at that location i. By running the network in a batch over all grid points i, we can reconstruct the full temperature profile T (xj ).

4

Fig. 1: Neural network surrogate model. The parameter and coordinate branches are independent until the last layer in which
their results are combined via inner product to arrive at a final temperature prediction. A batch of runs throughout the mixture
fraction domain can recreate the full temperature profile. Skip connections are not shown to maintain clarity. Training occurs
independently of discretization, and the network can be evaluated on any input Z in an arbitrary mesh.

We note here that the grid size is not directly specified in the network structure. The network is therefore not constrained to a fixed grid, and can solve
for a temperature profile on any arbitrarily discretized
Zj . We can thus train without interpolation on simulation data from Cantera, which solves on adaptively
refined grids that differ with each j. After training
is complete, we can again take advantage of the network structure to generate temperature profiles on any
grid of our choice, simplifying downstream calculations. We additionally remark that the isolation of
the parameter and coordinate networks separates the
two fundamentally different inputs: rate constants and
mixture fractions. In doing so, it may wield greater
performance than standard networks due to the inductive bias, or existing knowledge of the problem’s
structure, encoded directly into the network [15].
In order to optimize performance, we selected the
hyperparameters of the network such as the number
of layers, nodes per layer, and learning rate using
the Ray Tune package [20], which methodically and
efficiently sweeps through a provided hyperparameter input range in order to select the best values to
use during training. While this tool does not provide an exactly optimal network structure, it greatly
increased performance in this case when compared to
initial testing. The final network is shown in Fig. 1.
The learning rate and batch size used in training were
0.00076 and 64, respectively.
Certain other features in the network were selected manually. Residual networks [21] with skip
connections every two layers were used for both
the coordinate and parameter networks. Sigmoidweighted Linear Units [22] were used as activation functions. The ADAM optimizer [23] was
used to train for the first eight hundred epochs,
after which a second-order limited memory Broy-

den–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno (LBFGS) optimizer
was used until the training plateaued to improve final performance while limiting overfitting. 15% of
the data was withheld as out of sample testing data,
and 33% of the remainder for in-sample validation.
After training, we verified the network’s gradients
against the Cantera solver. The network trains to minimize error in the temperature values, but this does
not guarantee low error in their gradients. We justified use of the network for gradient-intensive subspace computation by comparing its gradients against
those found analytically in Cantera. At each location
Z in Z we computed gradient values from the network using the same automatic differentiation algorithm as was used in network training, and those from
Cantera using built-in analytical sensitivity packages,
then compared their cosine similarities,

CSZ =

⟨∇x TZ,net , ∇x TZ,Cantera ⟩
.
∥ ∇x TZ,net ∥∥ ∇x TZ,Cantera ∥

(7)

Here CSZ is the cosine similarity at the mixture
fraction Z, ∇x TZ,net is the temperature gradient
vector evaluated through the network at Z, and
∇x TZ,Cantera is the same in Cantera. CSZ ranges
from −1 to 1, where a value of ±1 indicates perfect
directional alignment but positive or negative correlations, respectively, and a value of 0 indicates orthogonality.
3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Surrogate Neural Network Training
We present mean squared error training results for
our specialized neural network surrogate model in
Fig. 2. The ADAM optimizer ran for roughly 800

5

training epochs, though in Fig. 2 we observe future training may be accelerated through earlier stopping. The LBFGS optimizer then ran just until the
error plateaued. This second step improved accuracy,
while its brevity limited overfitting. A plot comparing a sample network-generated temperature profile
against the Cantera solution is shown in Fig. 3. We
observe strong qualitative agreement between the network and Cantera, and a quantitative error of less than
1% within the high-temperature (>1000K) region.

of 0.99 on average in the high-temperature flame region. As expected, the low-temperature out-of-flame
regions with behavior not captured by the trained
chemical kinetic model do not see useful agreement
and are not relevant to the analysis at hand. With
strong agreement in temperature and temperature gradient between our specialized neural network and
Cantera, we proceed in the next section to the application of our neural network in kinetic sensitivity
analysis and uncertainty quantification.

Fig. 2: Neural network mean squared error loss at each
epoch. Sharp decay at end of training from LBFGS optimizer. Training, validation, and testing error decreased similarly throughout training, suggesting minimal overfitting.

Fig. 4: Cosine similarity of temperature gradients across the
flame. Very strong gradient agreement of 0.99 on average
is seen between network predictions and Cantera solutions
throughout the high-temperature in-flame region.

3.2. Kinetic Subspace Identification
We implemented the active subspace algorithm detailed in Eq. (4) and computed the eigenvalues and
eigenvectors of the matrix C. Fig. 5 depicts the eigenvalues at three representative locations in the flame:
the oxidizer side, the fuel side, and near the peak temperature location. A large drop of roughly two orders of magnitude is seen between the first and second
eigenvalues in all three examples. While not pictured,
a similar result was also found in the rest of the mixture fraction domain. Thus, we chose r = 1 for the
local active subspaces and defined each with w1 only,
discarding the extra dimensions w2 through wd as the
inactive subspace.
In Fig. 6, we inspect three of these active subspaces
wi at the same three representative locations across
the flame (oxidizer side, near temperature peak, and
fuel side) in an attempt to discover generality across
the domain. We do not see strong agreement in the
local subspace directions, indicating that a singledimension global subspace does not exist. We note,
however, that of the 217 rate constants/reactions, the
subspaces at the three locations seem to all include
the same five or ten most influential reactions, with
different ratios, in their active directions. This observed similarity motivates the second stage of reduction detailed in Eq. (5) to an ru -dimensional global
subspace.
We present the results of obtaining the global kinetic subspace via singular value decomposition in

Fig. 3: Network temperature evaluation on testing data at the
end of training. Error in flame is kept below 1%. Qualitative
agreement with the Cantera solutions is strong.

In addition to the standard network loss, we report
out-of-sample gradient validation against the Cantera data. The network loss and comparison against
Cantera from Figs. 2 and 3 is based solely on the
temperature values T taken directly from the final
layer of the network. However, our sensitivity analysis method primarily involves use of temperature gradients ∂T /∂x, which require an additional auto-differentiation step. In Fig. 4, we report the cosine similarity of gradients computed through auto-differentiation in the trained network against those computed analytically in Cantera. We observe a cosine similarity

6

Fig. 5: First ten eigenvalues from C matrix in Eq. (4). Sharp
decline of roughly two orders of magnitude is visible between the first and second value seen in three samples spaced
around the temperature peak at Z = 0.2, justifying truncation
of active subspace to one direction per coordinate.

Fig. 8: Squares of singular values from SVD on matrix A,
expressed as the percentage of all squares of singular values
in the sum up to a given index. 100% at ru would indicate
that subspace variation across A could be represented by the
set of directions up to ru . Here 99.5% at the fourth index
justifies the truncation to ru = 4.

would need ru > 1 basis directions to describe the
variation in subspaces across the mixture fraction domain. In Fig. 8, we take the sum of these squared
singular values up to each index to inform our choice
of ru , the dimension of the final subspace basis. We
see that with just two active directions we can account for over 90% of the subspace variation across
the mixture fraction, with three directions over 98%,
and with four over 99.5%. With one, however, we can
only capture 62%. We selected the basis with ru = 4,
made up of the four vectors shown in Fig. 9 as our final global active subspace basis, though ru = 2 or
ru = 3 would be valid options in applications that
require lower computational cost and lower accuracy,
and conversely ru > 4 if extreme accuracy is needed.
In our case, we are able to accurately reduce the dimensionality of the uncertainty quantification problem at hand from d = 217 for this methane reaction
model down to ru = 4. A more detailed summary
of the kinetic composition of this 4-dimensional subspace is available in the supplementary material.

Fig. 6: Single-direction local active subspaces w1 reported
at the same three mixture fractions as Fig. 5. Lack of directional agreement suggests that a single local subspace cannot
describe behavior across the entire mixture fraction domain.

Fig. 7: Squares of singular values (σ 2 ) from the SVD decomposition of subspace matrix A in Eq. (5). Sharp dropoff like that in Fig. 5 is not observed after the first index,
motivating the use of more than one basis to capture full behavior.
Fig. 9: Final four active subspace directions chosen from
the 217-dimensional kinetic space, each shown in a different
color.

Figs 7, 8 and 9. As shown in Fig. 7, the SVD yields
squared singular values that do not drop off as sharply
as the original subspace eigenvalues do. This is expected from our hypothesis based on Fig. 6 that we

3.3. Global Kinetic Subspace Validation

7

We validated the accuracy and generality of the
obtained kinetic subspace by comparing results from
propagating rate constant perturbations in the full ddimensional (d = 217) kinetic space and in the reduced ru -rank (ru = 4) space through the Cantera solver according to Eq. 6. This simultaneously
validated the network’s ability to perform the subspace reduction accurately, since the subspace was
constructed by the network and is being validated in
Cantera. We computed the 2.5 and 97.5 quantiles of
the temperature variation around the nominal (unperturbed) value in each case to generate upper and lower
temperature bounds, as reported in Fig. 10. These error bounds have excellent agreement of 98% on average between the full (d) perturbation sample and the
reduced (ru ) perturbation sample, demonstrating success of the network-powered reduction from the full
kinetic space of 217 dimensions in this application
down to a more tractable 4-dimensional subspace.
We additionally demonstrate in Fig. 11 that temperature distributions in Cantera from perturbations in
the full d = 217 kinetic parameter space are uncorrelated between the fuel-lean side and fuel-rich sides
of the flame, thus an ru = 1 dimensional subspace
would not suffice to capture uncertainty responses
across the entire domain. This confirms a result previously discovered using the network. We also remark that the distributions generated from our ru = 4
dimensional subspace accurately represent those in
the full parameter space, even across these uncorrelated mixture fractions. Future turbulent combustion
work applying this information in the flamelet regime
could maintain high accuracy while only needing to
quantify uncertainty across four input dimensions instead of 217, indicating substantial savings in computational cost. For example, to propagate methane
flamelet uncertainty to LES simulations, Mueller et
al. found that exploration of the full kinetic space took
between 2,000 and 10,000 samples (or even up to
50,000), while exploring a one-dimensional reduced
space took seven or fewer [2].
This work demonstrated the feasibility of our novel
dimension reduction methodology in a proof-of-concept flamelet example. We note that the methodology
is designed to scale up easily to expanded input and
output domains. By adding strain rate, equivalence ratio, or other parameters to the input layer of the parameter network and augmenting the training data accordingly, a subspace can be discovered that describes
a more comprehensive set of flamelets. By adding
neurons to the final output layer and modifying the
loss function accordingly, the uncertainty response of
species concentrations and other quantities of interest
can be analyzed along with temperature. Further work
to apply this methodology to a turbulent combustion
simulation may adapt the framework of [2]. The reduced subspace would allow for a series of flamelet
tables that capture the uncertainty response in an LES

simulation with greatly reduced samples compared to
the full kinetic space, while maintaining a verifiable
and user-selectable level of accuracy.

Fig. 10: 95% uncertainty bounds in high-temperature region. (a) Nominal temperature values and full sample uncertainty range. (b) Uncertainty ranges predicted with full
and reduced subspace inputs centered on nominal temperature. Agreement of 98% on average.

Fig. 11: Joint temperature distributions that show weak correlation at fuel lean and fuel rich Z. Strong agreement between those predicted with the full rate constant space and
with the reduced subspace demonstrates the accuracy and
mixture fraction generality of the ru = 4 subspace.

4. Conclusions
In this work, we demonstrated a novel methodology for efficient uncertainty quantification in combustion simulations. A two-stage active subspace analysis powered by a specifically designed neural network
surrogate model was performed on one-dimensional

8

nonpremixed methane flamelets with GRI-Mech 3.0
[19]. The propagation of the kinetic uncertainty from
the rate constants to the flame temperature profile was
found to be more complex than can be described with
a single variable (a one-dimensional active subspace)
due to lack of correlation across the mixture fraction
domain, thus a global kinetic subspace with a dimensionality reduction of two orders of magnitude and
demonstrated accuracy was computed.
The accuracy of this reduced global subspace can
be finely tuned through choice of the truncation index at each stage, giving users the option to tailor the
low dimensional subspaces to meet their own accuracy or computational cost needs. Additionally, this
method can be further extended to scale to augmented
solution domains by adding further stages of subspace analysis, to include other target quantities such
as species profiles by extending the neural network
surrogate model, and to discover a universal subspace across various flame conditions by considering
strained effects. The flexibility, general applicability,
and low computational cost of this method make it a
promising tool for efficient uncertainty quantification
in large eddy simulations of turbulent combustion in
the flamelet regime.

[7] P. G. Constantine, E. Dow, Q. Wang, Active Subspace Methods in Theory and Practice: Applications
to Kriging Surfaces, SIAM J Sci Comput 36 (4) (2014)
A1500–A1524.
[8] W. Ji, J. Wang, O. Zahm, Y. Marzouk, B. Yang, Z. Ren,
C. Law, Shared Low-Dimensional Subspaces for Propagating Kinetic Uncertainty to Multiple Outputs, Combust. Flame 190 (2018) 146–157.
[9] T. Lukaczyk, F. Palacios, J. Alonso, P. Constantine,
Active Subspaces for Shape Optimization, in: 10th
AIAA Multidisciplinary Design Optimization Specialist Conference, 2014.
[10] S. Vajda, P. Valko, T. Turányi, Principal component
analysis of kinetic models, Int. J. Chem. Kinet. 17 (1)
(1985) 55–81.
[11] N. Wang, Q. Xie, X. Su, Z. Ren, Quantification of
modeling uncertainties in turbulent flames through
successive dimension reduction, Combust. Flame 222
(2020) 476–489.
[12] D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, R. J. Williams, Learning representations by back-propagating errors, Nature
323 (6088) (1986) 533–536.
[13] D. G. Goodwin, R. L. Speth, H. K. Moffat, B. W.
Weber, Cantera: An object-oriented software toolkit
for chemical kinetics, thermodynamics, and transport
processes, https://www.cantera.org, version
2.5.1 (2021).
[14] J. Duvall, K. Duraisamy, S. Pan, Non-linear Independent Dual System (NIDS) for Discretizationindependent Surrogate Modeling over Complex Geometries, arXiv:2109.07018 [physics] (2021).
[15] L. Lu, P. Jin, G. E. Karniadakis, DeepONet: Learning
nonlinear operators for identifying differential equations based on the universal approximation theorem of
operators, Nat. Mach. Intell. 3 (3) (2021) 218–229.
[16] O. Zahm, P. G. Constantine, C. Prieur, Y. M. Marzouk,
Gradient-Based Dimension Reduction of Multivariate
Vector-Valued Functions, SIAM J Sci Comput 42 (1)
(2020) A534–A558.
[17] W. Ji, T. Yang, Z. Ren, S. Deng, Dependence of kinetic sensitivity direction in premixed flames, Combust. Flame 220 (2020) 16–22.
[18] D. A. Sheen, X. You, H. Wang, T. Løvås, Spectral uncertainty quantification, propagation and optimization
of a detailed kinetic model for ethylene combustion,
Proc. Combust. Inst. 32 (1) (2009) 535–542.
[19] G. P. Smith, D. M. Golden, M. Frenklach, N. W.
Moriarty, B. Eiteneer, M. Goldenberg, C. T.
Bowman, R. K. Hanson, S. Song, W. C. Gardiner, Jr., V. V. Lissianski, Z. Qin, Gri-mech 3.0,
http://www.me.berkeley.edu/gri mech/.
[20] R. Liaw, E. Liang, R. Nishihara, P. Moritz, J. E. Gonzalez, I. Stoica, Tune: A research platform for distributed model selection and training, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1807.05118 (2018).
[21] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition, in: 2016 IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
2016, pp. 770–778.
[22] S. Elfwing, E. Uchibe, K. Doya, Sigmoid-Weighted
Linear Units for Neural Network Function Approximation in Reinforcement Learning, arXiv:1702.03118
[cs] (2017).
[23] D. P. Kingma, J. Ba, Adam: A Method for Stochastic
Optimization, arXiv:1412.6980 [cs] (2017).

Acknowledgments
BCK is partially supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No. 1745302. WJ and SD would like to
acknowledge the funding support by Weichai Power
Co., Ltd.
Supplementary material
Supplementary figures summarizing the kinetic
composition of the global subspace are available.
References
[1] T. Lu, C. K. Law, Toward accommodating realistic fuel
chemistry in large-scale computations, Prog. Energy
Combust. 35 (2) (2009) 192–215.
[2] M. E. Mueller, G. Iaccarino, H. Pitsch, Chemical kinetic uncertainty quantification for Large Eddy Simulation of turbulent nonpremixed combustion, Proc.
Combust. Inst. 34 (1) (2013) 1299–1306.
[3] W. Ji, Z. Ren, Y. Marzouk, C. K. Law, Quantifying kinetic uncertainty in turbulent combustion simulations
using active subspaces, Proc. Combust. Inst. 37 (2)
(2019) 2175–2182.
[4] J. M. Armengol, O. Le Maitre, R. Vicquelin, Bayesian
calibration of a methane-air global scheme and uncertainty propagation to flame-vortex interactions, Combust. Flame 234 (2021) 111642.
[5] X. Zhao, H. Kolla, P. Zhang, B. Wu, S. Calello,
H. N. Najm, A transported probability density function method to propagate chemistry uncertainty in reacting flow cfd, in: AIAA Scitech 2019 Forum, 2019,
p. 2007.
[6] H. Wang, D. A. Sheen, Combustion kinetic model
uncertainty quantification, propagation and minimization, Prog. Energy Combust. 47 (2015) 1–31.

9

