SGD-based optimization in modeling combustion
kinetics: case studies in tuning mechanistic and hybrid
kinetic models
Weiqi Jia,∗, Xingyu Sub , Bin Pangc , Yujuan Lic , Zhuyin Renb , Sili Denga,∗
a

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA
b
Center for Combustion Energy, Tsinghua University, Haidian, Beijing, 100084, China
c
Weichai Power Co. Ltd., Weifang, Shandong, China

Abstract
Chemical kinetic modeling is an integral part of combustion simulation,
and extensive efforts have been devoted to developing high-fidelity yet computationally affordable models. Despite these efforts, modeling combustion
kinetics is still challenging due to the demand for expert knowledge and
high dimensional optimization against experiments. Therefore, data-driven
approaches that enable efficient discovery and calibration of kinetic models have received much attention in recent years, the core of which is the
high-dimensional optimization based on big data. Evolutionary algorithms
are usually adopted for optimizing chemical kinetic models, although they
usually suffer from high computational costs and are limited to a small number of parameters. Meanwhile, gradient-based optimizations, especially the
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) methods, have shown success in developing
complex models by training large-scale deep learning models. Therefore, this
∗

Corresponding author
Email addresses: weiqiji@mit.edu (Weiqi Ji ), silideng@mit.edu (Sili Deng )

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

May 9, 2022

work explores the applications of SGD-based optimizations in tuning mechanistic kinetic models and learning hybrid kinetic models. We first showed
that SGD-based optimizations could substantially save computational cost
compared to evolutionary algorithms when the number of kinetic parameters
in mechanistic models reached about one hundred. We then demonstrated
that the SGD-based optimization enabled us to use a neural network model to
represent the pyrolysis of the Hybrid Chemistry and optimize the associated
hundreds of weights in the neural network . These proof-of-concept studies
showed that the SGD-based optimization is more efficient than evolutionary
algorithms, is a promising approach for developing chemical kinetic models with high dimensional parameters, and is capable of developing hybrid
mechanistic-machine learning kinetic models.
Keywords: Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), Data-driven Modeling,
Chemical Kinetics, Hybrid Modeling, Auto-differentiation
1. Introduction
The optimization of model parameters plays a critical role in the development of chemical kinetic models. The widely adopted optimization
techniques in combustion kinetic modeling can be categorized into heuristic
algorithms and response surface techniques [1, 2]. Heuristic algorithms [3–8]
such as genetic algorithms usually perform well with less than 100 parameters
and small datasets. This is due to fact that the genetic algorithms require a
large number of samples to explore the parameter space, and the computational cost of genetic algorithms scales with the number of parameters and
number of samples in the dataset. Response surface techniques [9] alleviate
2

the intensive computational cost in performing target simulations with the
proposed kinetic models by building a function approximation that maps the
model parameter space to model predictions. Similar to heuristic algorithms,
however, response surface techniques are also limited to low dimensional
model parameter space [10] and small datasets, for the cost of building a
response surface scales with the dimension of parameter space and the number of quantities of interest. Meanwhile, recent development in diagnostic
techniques and experiment automation [11] have significantly increased the
efficiency of experimental data generation and driven combustion research
into the big data regime. Therefore, optimization methods that can handle
large dataset effectively and efficiently would greatly benefit the development
of chemical kinetic models in addition to high-throughput experimentation.
While seldom exploited in combustion modeling, optimization algorithms
based on stochastic gradient descent (SGD) has shown promise in nonconvex
optimization for complex nonlinear models, and SGD has played a central
role in driving the boom of deep learning in the last decade [12]. Furthermore, various techniques have been developed in conjunction with SGD to
increase the generalization performance of the optimized model. For instance,
a modern deep learning optimizer not only focuses on minimizing the loss
functions but also regularizes the model to increase the extrapolation capability. Generalization to different conditions and tasks is an important feature
for classical physics-based chemical models. With good generalization capability, a chemical model that was developed based on canonical combustion
experiments should also work reasonably well in simulating the reactions in
practical combustion systems. Therefore, SGD is potentially not only more

3

efficient but also more generalizable compared to heuristic optimization algorithms.
One of the major obstacles for exploiting SGD in combustion modeling is the lack of software ecosystems that can efficiently and accurately
compute the gradient of simulation output to model parameters. For instance, the finite difference method (often termed the brute-force method)
usually suffers from both computational inefficiency, as the cost scales with
the number of parameters, and inaccuracy due to truncation error. Conversely, stochastic gradient descent based on auto-differentiation (AD) has
shown both efficiency and accuracy in the training of large-scale deep neural
network models [12]. Many open-source AD packages have been developed
in the last decade, including TensorFlow [13], Jax [14] backed by Google,
PyTorch [15] backed by Facebook, ForwardDiff.jl [16] and Zygote.jl [17] in
Julia. Fortunately, an open-source AD-powered differentiable combustion
simulation package Arrhenius.jl [18] has been developed recently to enable
differentiable programming in combustion modeling. The package incorporates combustion physics models into AD ecosystems in Julia and thus enable
auto-differentiation across combustion models, such as computing the gradient of species concentrations with respect to the kinetic parameters. This
work thus employs Arrhenius.jl to explore the opportunities of SGD-based
optimization in modeling complex combustion kinetics.
In this work, we explore the capability of SGD-based optimization in
two optimization tasks: optimizing a mechanistic kinetic model and learning
a hybrid neural-mechanistic kinetic model. Optimization of a mechanistic
model is usually an integral part of calibrating kinetic models against exper-

4

imental data [6] or a reference model. For example, optimizing an empirical
kinetic model or an overly reduced kinetic model against a detailed kinetic
model [7, 19]. It proceeds by tuning the Arrhenius parameters to enable the
predictions of the optimized kinetic model to agree with the target detailed
kinetic model.
For the hybrid kinetic model [20], a neural network model is used to represent part of the kinetic process, e.g., the pyrolysis of large hydrocarbon fuels,
and thus one can train a neural network model to predict the combustion
process without providing a reaction template based on expert knowledge.
When simulating combustion processes, the neural network takes the species
concentrations and temperature as inputs and predicts the production rate
of each species, similar to a mechanistic model. Learning a hybrid neural
network/mechanistic model is a relatively new adventure since it is computationally infeasible to train the neural network model using conventional
evolutionary optimization algorithms. While SGD-based optimization should
be able to handle the computational load, the training is not trivial. Since
the neural network is coupled with the mechanistic model, one has to take
the mechanistic model into the gradient calculation as well. Previous work
[20] has assumed that all intermediate species are measurable and thus one
can decouple the neural network model from the mechanistic model during
training. However, this assumption often does not hold due to the complexity of the chemical kinetics and limited diagnostic capability. Here we adopt
the Arrhenius.jl to enable computing the gradient for the hybrid model and
explore the possibility of learning the hybrid model using SGD-based optimization.

5

This paper is structured as follows: we shall first briefly introduce the
numerical approaches in Sec. 2, including the package of Arrhenius.jl 2.1 and
the equations for various gradient calculations in Sec. 2.2. We then present
the application in optimizing mechanistic kinetic model and hybrid neural
network/mechanistic kinetic model in Sec. 3. Finally, we draw conclusions
in Sec. 4.
2. Numerical Approaches
2.1. Arrhenius.jl
Arrhenius.jl [18] is built in the programming language of Julia to leverage
the rich ecosystems of auto-differentiation and differential equation solvers.
Arrhenius.jl does two types of differentiable programming: (i) it can differentiate elemental computational blocks. For example, it can differentiate the reaction source term with respect to kinetic and thermodynamic parameters as
well as species concentrations. Arrhenius.jl leverages the language-wide autodifferentiation of Julia programming language to do the auto-differentiation
and thus preclude the need of deriving the formula of the gradient/Jacobian
matrix. (ii) It can also differentiate the numerical solvers in various ways, such
as solving the continuous sensitivity equations [21] as done in CHEMKIN [22]
and Cantera [23] and in adjoint methods [24, 25]. An example of this type
of differentiation is computing the gradients of species concentrations with
respect to chemical kinetic model parameters and initial compositions. The
first type of differentiation is usually the basis of the second type of higherlevel differentiation. Arrhenius.jl offers the core functionality of combustion
simulations in native Julia programming, such that users can conveniently
6

build applications on top of Arrhenius.jl and exploit various approaches to
do high-level differentiation.
Figure 1 shows a schematic of the structure of the Arrhenius.jl package. Arrhenius.jl reads in the chemical mechanism files in YAML format
maintained by the Cantera [23] community; the chemical mechanism files
contain the kinetic model, thermodynamic, and transport databases. The
core functionality of Arrhenius.jl is to compute the reaction source terms
and mixture properties, such as heat capacities, enthalpies, entropies, Gibbs
free energies, etc. In addition, Arrhenius.jl offers flexible interfaces for users
to define neural network models as submodels and augment them with existing physical models. For example, one can use a neural network submodel
to represent unknown reaction pathways and exploit various scientific machine learning methods to train the neural network models, such as neural
ordinary differential equations [26–29] and physics-informed neural network
models [30, 31]. One can then implement the governing equations for different applications with these core functionalities and solve the governing
equations using classical numerical methods or neural-network-based solvers,
such as physics-informed neural networks [30]. Arrhenius.jl provides solvers
for canonical combustion problems, such as simulating the auto-ignition in
constant volume/pressure reactors and oxidation in jet-stirred reactors. The
governing equations implemented in the package is generally following those
of CHEMKIN [22] and Cantera [23]. The package has also been validated
against Cantera [23] in various canonical programs, such as pyrolysis, ignition, and sensitivity analysis of one-dimensional flame.

7

Figure 1: Schematic showing the structure of the Arrhenius.jl package.

In contrast to legacy combustion simulation packages, Arrhenius.jl can
not only provide predictions given the physical models but also optimize
model parameters given experimental measurements. By efficiently and accurately evaluating the gradient of the solution outputs to the model parameters, experimental data can be incorporated into the simulation pipeline to
enable data-driven modeling with deep learning algorithms. Note that one
can also achieve differentiable capability with existing combustion software,
such as CHEMKIN [22] and Cantera [23]. For example, ADIFOR [32] developed in 1970s can be employed to do auto-differentiation over subroutines
in CHEMKIN. However, modern optimization and machine learning packages are usually in high-level languages (e.g., Python and Julia [33]), and

8

thus one has to deal with the compatibility issues among modern high-level
languages and low-level languages (e.g., C++ and FORTRAN). On the contrary, Arrhenius.jl can conveniently connecting combustion modeling with
optimization and machine learning without introducing the complexity of
low-level languages.
2.2. Gradient Calculation
In this section, we briefly discuss how Arrhenius.jl can enhance various
approaches for computing the gradient (sensitivity) in jet-stirred reactors,
shock tubes, and laminar flame experiments. In general, we deal with two
kinds of gradient calculations [22], i.e., steady-state solutions and transient
solutions.
Examples of steady-state solutions are the modeling of species profiles in
jet-stirred reactors and steady laminar flames. Without loss of generality, we
can write down the governing equations in vector form as
F (φ(α); α) = 0,

(1)

where F corresponds to the residual vector, φ corresponds to the solution
vector, and α corresponds to model parameters, such as the kinetic, thermodynamic, and transport parameters. By differentiating Eq. 1 with respect
to the α, we obtain matrix equations for the gradients.
∂F ∂φ ∂F
+
= 0,
∂φ ∂α ∂α

(2)

∂φ
where ∂α
are the Jacobian matrices of the solution vector with respect to

model parameters. Normally, for optimization, we have a scalar loss function

9

defined as L(φ). The gradient of the loss function with respect to model
parameters can be readily achieved via
∂L ∂φ
∂L
=
.
∂α
∂φ ∂α

(3)

With Arrhenius.jl, we can leverage AD to compute the two Jacobian matrices of ∂F
and ∂F
. Unlike packages for calculating the analytical Jacobian
∂φ
∂α
[34], efficient computation of the Jacobian can be achieved without developing the analytical form. In addition, general AD enables us to differentiate
over neural network submodels, which is difficult to implement using analytical approaches. If the solution variables are discretized in a computational
domain, e.g., the one-dimensional freely propagating flame, one can readily
leverage multi-threading to evaluate the two Jacobians without complex code
re-factorization using parallel computing.
Examples of transient solutions are auto-ignition and fuel pyrolysis in
shock tubes. The governing equations are in the general form of
dφ
= F (φ, t; α),
dt

(4)

∂φ
where t is the time. A natural approach to compute the gradient W = ∂α
is

solving the governing equations of W , i.e.,
dW
∂F
∂F
=
W+
.
dt
∂φ
∂α

(5)

In addition to solving Eq. 5, Arrhenius.jl leverages various adjoint sensitivity algorithms provided in DifferentialEquations.jl. For comprehensive
comparisons of various algorithms in computing the gradient of solution variables for transient solutions, readers shall consult [24].
10

In general, calculating the gradient for transient solutions involving stiff
chemical kinetic models is expensive, as computation time usually scales
with both the number of species and the number of parameters. Meanwhile,
global combustion behaviors, such as ignition delay times (IDTs), are usually
more experimentally accessible compared to measurements of concentration
profiles. Recent work [21, 35–37] has substantially advanced the algorithms
for computing the gradient of IDT. Therefore, the current work employs the
sensBVP method [35], which converts the initial value problem (IVP) to a
boundary value problem (BVP) by treating the temperature at ignition as a
boundary condition and the IDT as a free variable to solve. In other words,
the problem is converted from a transient problem to a steady-state problem,
similar to the solution of a one-dimensional freely propagating flame.
3. Results and Discussion
We now present case studies using SGD-based optimization for optimizing
complex combustion kinetic modelings where the dimension of parameters is
too high for traditional optimization algorithms, such as genetic algorithms.
3.1. Optimizing Mechanistic Kinetic Model
Most skeletal chemical models are obtained by removing unimportant
species and the associated reactions from the master model, leaving the kinetic parameters of the remaining pathways unchanged after the reduction.
Various systematic mechanism reduction approaches have been developed to
generate skeletal mechanism [38–40]. There has also been increasing interest
in optimizing the kinetic parameters in overly reduced reaction models to
compensate for the error introduced by over-reduction [7, 19]. Regardless of
11

the controversy of tuning the kinetic parameters during optimization, this
approach has the potential to produce a smaller model with higher fidelity
than the ones obtained via traditional reduction methods. The reductionoptimization approach proceeds by sampling from target conditions and then
optimizing the reduced model to achieve similar predictions as the master
mechanism under all sampled conditions. This work thus takes this optimization process as a case study for SGD-based optimization, i.e., using SGDbased optimization to minimize the discrepancies between reduced model and
original detailed mechanism.
We demonstrate SGD-based optimization in reducing and optimizing two
chemical models for natural gas and n-heptane, the master models of which
are the GRI3.0 mechanism [41] and the Nordin1998 mechanism [42], respectively. As previously discussed, overly reduced models using classical reduction approaches with a large threshold or intuition are firstly obtained,
with the number of species in GRI3.0 reduced from 53 to 23, and that in
Nordin1998 reduced from 41 to 34. The reduction is targeted for simulating natural gas engines and diesel engines with the commercial software of
Converge [43]. For GRI3.0, we first removed the following species using an iterative reduction involving DRG [44], DRGEP [45], PFA [40], and sensitivity
analysis: C, CH3 OH, C2 H, C2 H2 , HCCO, CH2 CO, HCCOH, NH, NH2 , NH3 ,
N2 O, HNO, CN, HCN, H2 CN, HCNN, HCNO, HOCN, HNCO, NCO, Ar,
and CH2 CHO. We then further removed the species of CH3 CHO, NO2 , NO,
NNH, N, C2 H3 , and CH2 OH, CH by removing NO-chemistry for Converge
has a built-in NO module and following the reduction of DRM19 [46]. The
overly reduced model is denoted as SK23 with 23 species. For Nordin1998,

12

the following species were removed based on the reduction of GRI3.0: C3 H5 ,
C3 H4 , C2 H6 , CH4 O2 , CH3 O2 , CH3 O, and C2 H2 . The overly reduced model
is denoted as SK34 with 34 species. Note that the way to produce an overly
reduced model can be regarded as a hyper-parameters subject to explore.
This work focuses on the demonstration of the optimization algorithms, and
we leave the optimal choice of removed species to future studies. It should be
noted that one can also optimize an existing empirical semi-global reaction
model against a detailed model without consulting the skeletal mechanism
reduction.
The kinetic parameters of these overly reduced models were subsequently
optimized to retain the predictability of the master models. The ignition delay times and laminar flame speeds (SLs) are utilized as performance metrics
to validate the overly reduced and optimized models against the corresponding master models. As shown in Fig. 2, for GRI3.0, SK23 over-predicts IDT
at high temperatures and under-predicts SL at all equivalence ratios. For
Nordin1998, SK34 significantly over-predicts the IDT at low temperatures,
especially within the negative temperature coefficient region, while the flame
speeds are hardly affected by the reduction.
The optimization of the kinetic parameters of the over-reduced models
was conducted on all three Arrhenius parameters, namely, A, b, Ea . Although both IDT and SL could be selected as targets for optimization, we
only utilized the IDT for its relatively lower computational cost than SL.
Moreover, the top ten reactions selected based on the sensitivity analysis
for the SL were excluded from the optimization, such that the optimization will not change these key reactions for SL. We then randomly sampled

13

Figure 2: Predicted ignition delay times and flame speeds for representative cases: (a-b)
the mixture of natural gas/air using the master mechanism GRI3.0, skeletal mechanism
SK23 and optimized SK23 OP. The ignition delay time was simulated using the fuel composition of CH4 : C2 H4 : C3 H8 = 0.85 : 0.1 : 0.05 by volume, pressure of 40 atm,
equivalence ratio of 0.9. The flame speed was simulated at 40 atm and 300 K, and (c-d)
the mixture of n-heptane/air using the master mechanism Nordin1998, skeletal mechanism
SK34 and optimized SK34 OP. The ignition delay time was simulated at pressure of 40
atm, equivalence ratio of 1.2. The flame speed was simulated at 40 atm and 500 K.

500 initial conditions covering a wide range of mixture compositions and
thermodynamic states for training. For GRI3.0, the range of the pressure,
initial temperature, and equivalence ratios are 1-60 atm, 1100-2000 K, and

14

0.5-1.8, respectively, and the fuel composition is set as CH4 : C2 H4 : C3 H8
= 0.85 : 0.1 : 0.05 by volume. Similarly, for Nordin1998, the ranges of the
pressure, initial temperature, and equivalence ratio are 1-60 atm, 850-1800
K, and 0.5-1.5, respectively.
The datasets were split into training and validation datasets with a ratio
of 70:30. During each parameter update, one case was randomly sampled to
evaluate its IDT, and this process can be viewed as mini-batching with the
batch size of one. Instead of optimizing the Arrhenius parameters directly,
we optimized the relative changes of Arrhenius parameters compared to their
nominal values, i.e.,
p = [ln(A/A0 ), b − b0 , Ea − Ea0 ],

(6)

where the subscript 0 refers to the base model. The units of Ea are specified
as cal/mol as we tried to minimize the changes in Ea. However, if one wants
to ensure the change in Ea is relatively comparable to the change in A, one
may specify the unit of Ea as kcal/mol, as a change of 2 kcal/mol in Ea is
close to e times of change in A, such that the changes in A and Ea will be
balanced and avoid stiffness in the parameter space.
The loss function was defined as the mean square error (MSE) between
the predicted IDTs in the logarithmic scale using the reduced model and the
master model:

Loss = M SE log(IDT sk ), log(IDT master ).

(7)

The gradients of IDT to kinetic parameters were computed using the sensBVP method proposed in [35]. The Adam [47] optimizer with the default
learning rate of 0.001 was adopted. Weight decaying and early stopping were
15

employed to regularize the parameters, such that the optimization prefers
kinetic parameters that are close to their original values. Figure 3 shows the
training history of the loss function and the L2 -norm of the model parameters
for the Nordin1998 model. We trained the reduced model for 100 epochs and
stopped the training when the loss function as well as the model parameters
reached a plateau.

Figure 3: Training history of loss functions, L2 -norm of model parameters. Regularization
settings: weight-decay of 1e-4 with a learning rate of 1e-3.

The performance of the optimized skeletal mechanisms is also shown in
Fig. 2. For the IDT, as targeted in the optimization, the optimized models
agree with the master models very well for both two fuels. One interesting
observation is that the optimized models also work well for SL, although SL
is not targeted for optimization. This could be attributed to several reasons. For GRI3.0, the optimization compensates for the errors in the hightemperature chemistry seen in the predicted IDT, and those re-calibrated
16

high-temperature chemical pathways lead to accurate predictions of SL. For
Nordin1998, the skeletal models already accurately predict the IDT at high
temperatures as well as the SL, and the optimization does not degrade the
prediction of SL thanks to the regularization. It is worth noting that the
optimized SK23 still under-predicts SL at fuel-rich conditions, potentially
because some of the sensitive reactions for fuel-rich conditions are not fixed
during optimization; further refinement of the fixed reactions is therefore
suggested. Furthermore, the optimization is computationally efficient. Qualitatively speaking, previously employed genetic algorithms have to be performed on clusters [19], while the current work was performed on an ordinary
workstation within an hour. In summary, these two case studies demonstrate
the ability of SGD-based optimization to optimize complex reaction models
with high accuracy, good generalization capability, and high efficiency. Such
optimization capability will help augment current mechanism reduction techniques.
3.2. Optimizing Hybrid Neural Network/Mechanistic Kinetic Models
We then explore the optimization of hybrid neural network/mechanistic
kinetic model to develop a neural-network-based pyrolysis submodel [20]
within the HyChem model framework [48]. Our recently developed Chemical Reaction Neural Network (CRNN) [28] approach was employed to develop the neural network model for its interpretability, such that the learned
model complies with fundamental physical laws and provides chemical insights, as well as its compatibility with large-scale combustion simulation
package/software. The conventional HyChem-based pyrolysis submodels require expert knowledge on the chemical kinetics which takes years to de17

velop. On the contrary, the CRNN approach aims to autonomously discover
the reaction pathways and kinetic parameters simultaneously to accelerate
high-fidelity chemical model development. In the following demonstration,
the CRNN-HyChem approach was utilized to model the jet fuel of JP10.
As shown in Fig. 4, the CRNN-HyChem approach models the fuel chemistry of JP10 with two submodels, similar to the original HyChem concept.
The CRNN submodel models the breakdown of JP10 fuel molecules into
smaller hydrocarbons up to C6 H6 , and the submodel for C0 -C6 describes the
oxidation chemistry. For proof-of-concept, we chose the same species in the
original HyChem pyrolysis submodel [48] to be included in the CRNN model;
however, it should be noted that the such chosen species can be treated as
hyper-parameters to circumvent the need for expert knowledge and achieve
potentially better performance. In the original CRNN approach [28], the
Law of Mass Action and Arrhenius Law are enforced by the design of the
structure of the neural network. Reaction orders are assumed to be equal
to the stoichiometric coefficients for the reactants. In the present study, elemental conservation is further guaranteed by projecting the stoichiometric
coefficients into the elemental conservation space. For better convergence,
the stoichiometric coefficients for JP10 are fixed as -1, and during the training, the stoichiometric coefficients are regularized to achieve better numerical
stability. The training data were generated by simulating the IDT using the
original JP10 HyChem model. A wide range of thermodynamic conditions
were considered: pressures of 1-60 atm, initial temperatures of 1100-1800 K,
and equivalence ratios of 0.5-1.5. In total, 500 thermodynamic conditions
were randomly generated using the latin hypercube sampling method. The

18

dataset was split into training and validation datasets with a ratio of 70:30,
respectively.

Figure 4: Schematic showing the structure of the CRNN-HyChem approach.

The learned stoichiometric coefficients and kinetic parameters are shown
in Table 1, where negative and positive stoichiometric coefficients correspond
to reactants and products, respectively. Qualitatively, most of the learned
pathways are H-abstraction reactions, which is consistent with the expertderived HyChem models. However, quantitatively, the learned pathways are
not the same as those in the HyChem model, and further efforts will be
directed to extracting physical insights from the learned pathways. Figure
5 compares the results of the learned CRNN model and the IDTs generated using the original HyChem model [48], and they agree very well. The
results thus demonstrate the capability of SGD-based optimization in learning CRNN models with hundreds of parameters, which is computationally
challenging with evolutionary algorithms. With the increasing demand for
19

rapidly developed kinetic models for new renewable fuels for screening and
fuel design, hybrid neural network/mechanistic modeling provides an elegant
approach to autonomously derive kinetic models from experimental data.
SGD-based optimization will play a vital role in enabling such kind of autonomous model discovery algorithms. While this manuscript focuses on
learning the reaction pathways from scratch, one can also develop a datadriven model based on existing kinetic models for similar fuels and utilize
SGD-based optimization for the training, as demonstrated in [49].

20

Figure 5: Comparisons between the predicted ignition delay times using the learned CRNN
model (Y-axis) and the HyChem model (X-axis) for both the training and validation
datasets.

21

Table 1: Learned stoichiometric coefficients and kinetic parameters. Reaction orders are
assumed to be equal to the stoichiometric coefficients for reactants.

4. Conclusions
This work explores SGD-based optimization for optimizing complex chemical kinetic models, including both mechanistic kinetic models and hybrid
neural network/mechanistic kinetic models. The results show that SGDbased optimization requires significantly less computational resources compared to traditional evolutionary optimization approaches for hundreds of
model parameters. Furthermore, SGD-based optimization enables us to augment neural network models to represent the unknown reaction pathways
and optimize the involved hundreds of parameters, which is computationally
intractable with traditional genetic algorithms.
We expect that SGD-based optimization could greatly facilitate the integration of modern deep learning techniques into combustion modeling, especially the physics-informed machine learning [50] that takes the advantage of
both physics-based and data-driven modeling. This work is proof-of-concept
study to take advantage of SGD-based optimization for optimizing combustion models and only deterministic forward problems are presented. There

22

are a lot of opportunities and open challenges to extend the approaches to
inverse problems and design of experiments using Bayesian inference which
also heavily relies on differential programming and SGD-based optimization
[51, 52].
5. Acknowledgments
WJ and SD would like to acknowledge the funding support by Weichai
Power Co., Ltd. ZR and XS would like to acknowledge the support from
National Natural Science Foundation of China No. 52025062. WJ would like
to thank Dr. Ji-Woong Park for fruitful discussions on the deep mechanism
reduction, Dr. Vyaas Gururajan on the implementation of the sensBVP
method, Dr. Travis Sikes for discussions on mechanism optimization, Dr.
Christopher Rackauckas on the usages of DifferentialEquations.jl.
References
[1] M. Frenklach, H. Wang, M.J. Rabinowitz, Optimization and analysis of
large chemical kinetic mechanisms using the solution mapping method—
combustion of methane, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 18 (1992) 47–73.
[2] D.A. Sheen, H. Wang, Combustion kinetic modeling using multispecies
time histories in shock-tube oxidation of heptane, Combust. Flame 158
(2011) 645–656.
[3] G. Rein, C. Lautenberger, A. Fernandezpello, J. Torero, D. Urban,
Application of genetic algorithms and thermogravimetry to determine

23

the kinetics of polyurethane foam in smoldering combustion, Combust.
Flame 146 (2006) 95–108.
[4] A. Bertolino, M. Fürst, A. Stagni, A. Frassoldati, M. Pelucchi, C. Cavallotti, T. Faravelli, A. Parente, An evolutionary, data-driven approach
for mechanism optimization: Theory and application to ammonia combustion, Combust. Flame 229 (2021) 111366.
[5] L. Elliott, D. Ingham, A. Kyne, N. Mera, M. Pourkashanian, C. Wilson, Genetic algorithms for optimisation of chemical kinetics reaction
mechanisms, Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 30 (2004)
297–328.
[6] J.I. Ryu, K. Kim, K. Min, R. Scarcelli, S. Som, K.S. Kim, J.E. Temme,
C.B.M. Kweon, T. Lee, Data-driven chemical kinetic reaction mechanism for f-24 jet fuel ignition, Fuel 290 (2021) 119508.
[7] A. Mittal, S.D. Wijeyakulasuriya, D. Probst, S. Banerjee, C.E.A.
Finney, K.D. Edwards, M. Willcox, C. Naber, Multi-dimensional computational combustion of highly dilute, premixed spark-ignited opposedpiston gasoline engine using direct chemistry with a new primary reference fuel mechanism, Internal Combustion Engine Division Fall Technical Conference, vol. 2 (2017), V002T06A022.
[8] M. Cailler, N. Darabiha, B. Fiorina, Development of a virtual optimized chemistry method. application to hydrocarbon/air combustion,
Combustion and Flame 211 (2020) 281–302.

24

[9] D.A. Sheen, H. Wang, The method of uncertainty quantification and
minimization using polynomial chaos expansions, Combust. Flame 158
(2011) 2358–2374.
[10] W. Ji, J. Wang, O. Zahm, Y.M. Marzouk, B. Yang, Z. Ren, C.K. Law,
Shared low-dimensional subspaces for propagating kinetic uncertainty
to multiple outputs, Combust. Flame 190 (2018) 146–157.
[11] M. Tao, P.T. Lynch, P. Zhao, Kinetic modeling of ignition in miniature
shock tube, Proc. Combust. Inst. 37 (2019) 593–601.
[12] Y. Bengio, I. Goodfellow, A. Courville, Deep learning, vol. 1, MIT press,
Cambridge, MA, 2017.
[13] Y. Yu, M. Abadi, P. Barham, E. Brevdo, M. Burrows, A. Davis, J. Dean,
S. Ghemawat, T. Harley, P. Hawkins, M. Isard, M. Kudlur, R. Monga,
D. Murray, X. Zheng, Dynamic control flow in large-scale machine learning, Proceedings of the Thirteenth EuroSys Conference. ACM (2018),
pp. 265–283.
[14] J. Bradbury, R. Frostig, P. Hawkins, M.J. Johnson, C. Leary, D. Maclaurin, G. Necula, A. Paszke, J. VanderPlas, S. Wanderman-Milne,
Q. Zhang, JAX: Composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, http://github.com/google/jax (2018).
[15] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan,
T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, A. Desmaison, A. Köpf,
E. Yang, Z. DeVito, M. Raison, A. Tejani, S. Chilamkurthy, B. Steiner,

25

L. Fang, J. Bai, S. Chintala,

Pytorch: An imperative style, high-

performance deep learning library (2019), arXiv:1912.01703.
[16] J. Revels, M. Lubin, T. Papamarkou, Forward-mode automatic differentiation in julia (2016), arXiv:1607.07892.
[17] M. Innes,

Don’t unroll adjoint: Differentiating ssa-form programs

(2018), arXiv:1810.07951.
[18] W. Ji, S. Deng, Arrhenius.jl: A differentiable combustion simulation
package, https://github.com/DENG-MIT/Arrhenius.jl (2021).
[19] M. Kelly, G. Bourque, S. Dooley, Toward machine learned highly reduce
kinetic models for methane/air combustion (2021), arXiv:2103.08377.
[20] R. Ranade, S. Alqahtani, A. Farooq, T. Echekki, An ann based hybrid
chemistry framework for complex fuels, Fuel 241 (2019) 625–636.
[21] W. Ji, Z. Ren, C.K. Law, Evolution of sensitivity directions during
autoignition, Proc. Combust. Inst. 37 (2019) 807–815.
[22] R.J. Kee, F.M. Rupley, J.A. Miller, Chemkin-II: A fortran chemical kinetics package for the analysis of gas-phase chemical kinetics, Technical
report, Sandia National Lab., Livermore, CA (1989).
[23] D.G. Goodwin, R.L. Speth, H.K. Moffat, B.W. Weber, Cantera: An
object-oriented software toolkit for chemical kinetics, thermodynamics,
and transport processes, https://www.cantera.org (2021), doi:10.
5281/zenodo.4527812, Version 2.5.1.

26

[24] C. Rackauckas, Y. Ma, V. Dixit, X. Guo, M. Innes, J. Revels, J. Nyberg, V. Ivaturi, A comparison of automatic differentiation and continuous sensitivity analysis for derivatives of differential equation solutions
(2018), arXiv:1812.01892.
[25] C. Rackauckas, Q. Nie,

Differentialequations.jl–a performant and

feature-rich ecosystem for solving differential equations in julia, Journal
of Open Research Software 5 (2017).
[26] R.T.Q. Chen, Y. Rubanova, J. Bettencourt, D. Duvenaud, Neural ordinary differential equations (2018), arXiv:1806.07366.
[27] C. Rackauckas, Y. Ma, J. Martensen, C. Warner, K. Zubov, R. Supekar,
D. Skinner, A. Ramadhan, A. Edelman, Universal differential equations
for scientific machine learning (2020), arXiv:2001.04385.
[28] W. Ji, S. Deng, Autonomous discovery of unknown reaction pathways
from data by chemical reaction neural network, J. Phys. Chem. A 125
(2021) 1082–1092.
[29] O. Owoyele, P. Pal, Chemnode: A neural ordinary differential equations
framework for efficient chemical kinetic solvers, Energy and AI (2021)
100118.
[30] M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, G. Karniadakis, Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations, J. Comput. Phys.
378 (2019) 686–707.

27

[31] W. Ji, W. Qiu, Z. Shi, S. Pan, S. Deng, Stiff-pinn: Physics-informed
neural network for stiff chemical kinetics, The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 125 (2021) 8098–8106.
[32] C. Bischof, A. Carle, G. Corliss, A. Griewank, P. Hovland, Adifor–
generating derivative codes from fortran programs, Scientific Programming 1 (1992) 11–29.
[33] J. Bezanson, S. Karpinski, V.B. Shah, A. Edelman, Julia: A fast dynamic language for technical computing, arXiv preprint arXiv:1209.5145
(2012).
[34] K.E. Niemeyer, N.J. Curtis, C.J. Sung, pyjac: Analytical jacobian generator for chemical kinetics, Computer Physics Communications 215
(2017) 188–203.
[35] V. Gururajan, F.N. Egolfopoulos, Direct sensitivity analysis for ignition
delay times, Combust. Flame 209 (2019) 478–480.
[36] M. Lemke, L. Cai, J. Reiss, H. Pitsch, J. Sesterhenn, Adjoint-based sensitivity analysis of quantities of interest of complex combustion models,
Combust. Theory Model. 23 (2018) 180–196.
[37] S. Almohammadi, M. Hantouche, O.P. Le Maı̂tre, O.M. Knio, A tangent
linear approximation of the ignition delay time. i: Sensitivity to rate
parameters, Combust. Flame 230 (2021) 111426.
[38] T. Lu, C.K. Law, Toward accommodating realistic fuel chemistry in
large-scale computations, Progress in Energy and Combustion Science
35 (2009) 192–215.
28

[39] P. Pepiot-Desjardins, H. Pitsch, An efficient error-propagation-based
reduction method for large chemical kinetic mechanisms, Combustion
and Flame 154 (2008) 67–81.
[40] W. Sun, Z. Chen, X. Gou, Y. Ju, A path flux analysis method for the
reduction of detailed chemical kinetic mechanisms, Combust. Flame 157
(2010) 1298–1307.
[41] G.P. Smith, D.M. Golden, M. Frenklach, N.W. Moriarty, B. Eiteneer,
M. Goldenberg, C.T. Bowman, R.K. Hanson, S. Song, W.C. Gardiner,
V.V. Lissianski, Z. Qin, GRI-Mech 3.0, http://www.me.berkley.edu/
gri_mech/ (1999).
[42] N. Nordin, Numerical simulations of non-steady spray combustion using a detailed chemistry approach, thesis for the degree of Licentiate
of Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, Goteborg, Sweden
(1998).
[43] K. Richards, P. Senecal, E. Pomraning, Converge 3.0; convergent science: Madison, wi, usa, 2021.
[44] T. Lu, C.K. Law, On the applicability of directed relation graphs to the
reduction of reaction mechanisms, Combust. Flame 146 (2006) 472–483.
[45] P. Pepiot, H. Pitsch, Systematic reduction of large chemical mechanisms,
4th Joint Meeting of the US Sections of the Combustion Institute, vol.
2123 (2005).
[46] A. Kazakov, M. Frenklach, Reduced reaction sets based on GRI-mech
1.2, http://www.me.berkeley.edu/drm (1994).
29

[47] D.P. Kingma, J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic optimization
(2014), arXiv:1412.6980.
[48] Y. Tao, R. Xu, K. Wang, J. Shao, S.E. Johnson, A. Movaghar, X. Han,
J.W. Park, T. Lu, K. Brezinsky, et al., A physics-based approach to
modeling real-fuel combustion chemistry–III. reaction kinetic model of
JP10, Combust. Flame 198 (2018) 466–476.
[49] W. Ji, J. Zanders, J.W. Park, S. Deng, Machine learning approaches to
learn hychem models (2021), arXiv:2104.07875.
[50] G.E. Karniadakis, I.G. Kevrekidis, L. Lu, P. Perdikaris, S. Wang,
L. Yang, Physics-informed machine learning, Nature Reviews Physics 3
(2021) 422–440.
[51] H. Ge, K. Xu, Z. Ghahramani, Turing: a language for flexible probabilistic inference, International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
and Statistics, AISTATS 2018, 9-11 April 2018, Playa Blanca, Lanzarote, Canary Islands, Spain (2018),

pp. 1682–1690,

URL http:

//proceedings.mlr.press/v84/ge18b.html.
[52] M.D. Hoffman, A. Gelman, et al., The no-u-turn sampler: adaptively
setting path lengths in hamiltonian monte carlo., J. Mach. Learn. Res.
15 (2014) 1593–1623.

30

