Published as a workshop paper at ICLR 2021 SimDL Workshop

I NFERENCE OF CELL DYNAMICS ON PERTURBATION
DATA USING ADJOINT SENSITIVITY
Weiqi Ji1 , Bo Yuan2,3 , Ciyue Shen2,3 , Aviv Regev3,4,5 , Chris Sander2,3 , Sili Deng1
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA
2
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA
3
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA
4
Department of Biology, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02140, USA
5
Current address: Genentech, 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA, USA

arXiv:2104.06467v1 [q-bio.MN] 13 Apr 2021

1

A BSTRACT
Data-driven dynamic models of cell biology can be used to predict cell response
to unseen perturbations. Recent work (CellBox) had demonstrated the derivation
of interpretable models with explicit interaction terms, in which the parameters
were optimized using machine learning techniques. While the previous work was
tested only in a single biological setting, this work aims to extend the range of
applicability of this model inference approach to a diversity of biological systems.
Here we adapted CellBox in Julia differential programming and augmented the
method with adjoint algorithms, which has recently been used in the context of
neural ODEs. We trained the models using simulated data from both abstract and
biology-inspired networks, which afford the ability to evaluate the recovery of
the ground truth network structure. The resulting accuracy of prediction by these
models is high both in terms of low error against data and excellent agreement
with the network structure used for the simulated training data. While there is no
analogous ground truth for real life biological systems, this work demonstrates the
ability to construct and parameterize a considerable diversity of network models
with high predictive ability. The expectation is that this kind of procedure can
be used on real perturbation-response data to derive models applicable to diverse
biological systems.

1

I NTRODUCTION

Detailed information about interactions between molecules in biological processes can be an important ingredient for methods that aim to predict cellular behavior in response to perturbations and in
deriving mechanistic models of disease processes Khatri et al. (2012). Typical networks models in
the biological literature are based on small scale targeted molecular experiments and while having
led to a significant corpus of molecular biology knowledge, they are often incomplete and / or not
quantitatively predictive. New modeling opportunities arise from modern perturbation screening
and profiling techniques that have been used to generate rich biological datasets. These have greatly
improved the potential for using machine learning technology to build much more comprehensive
predictive interaction models according to what one might call the perturbation-interaction-response
paradigm.
Standard computational methods, however, are typically insufficient for accurate and efficient network inference. Static models, e.g., using partial correlation, maximum entropy or mutual information do not use time-resolved information Locasale & Wolf-Yadlin (2009); Chan et al. (2017).
Dynamic models, e.g. dynamic Bayesian networks, and ordinary differential equation (ODE) models typically require prior knowledge of kinetic parameters, which are often not available Zou &
Conzen (2005); Hill et al. (2017). Deep learning models, although usually providing good predictive ability, often lack interpretability to help understand the system Zhou & Troyanskaya (2015);
Montavon et al. (2018). Recent work of interpretable neural differential equations by Rackauckas
et al. (2020) combines the idea of neural ODEs Chen et al. (2018) and physics-based models, pro1

Published as a workshop paper at ICLR 2021 SimDL Workshop

Figure 1: Workflow for CellBox augmented by adjoint sensitivity optimization.
viding a potential merge of deep learning and biological network inference for scientific machine
learning models.
We have previously developed a hybrid approach, CellBox, that combines explicit ODE models of
cellular interactions with an automatic differentiation framework implemented in TensorFlow (Yuan
et al. (2020) ). While successful for a specific cancer cell line, CellBox had some key limitations
including, (1) we only tested in one specific system; (2) the model was trained only on steady-state
data; (3) there exists potential truncation errors during numerical ODE solving due to the use of
non-stiff solvers on stiff biological systems, and (4) we used arbitrarily fixed time step, due to the
fact that the computational graph is static in TensorFlow.
Here, we implemented the CellBox algorithm in Julia with the aim to move beyond these limitations. We replaced back propagation through time with adjoint sensitivity Fröhlich et al. (2017)
and changed Heun’s ODE solver with fixed time steps to high-order ODE solvers with adaptive
time steps. Therefore, the new implementation would allow adjoint backward optimization on full
trajectory simulation. Using simulated data from both abstract and biology-inspired networks, we
demonstrate that the new implementation can accurately predict the dynamic time course of cell response to unseen perturbations. Importantly, this method can efficiently infer molecular interaction
parameters with high accuracy for various network structures. These results, taken together, strongly
suggest the broad applicability of CellBox in a diversity of systems.

2

M ETHOD

2.1

C ELL B OX MODEL

Following Yuan et al. (2020), a set of ODEs was used to describe the time development of the system
variables upon perturbation (Eq. 1).
dxµ (t)
=α
dt



Φ Wxµ (t) − uµ − xµ (t)

(1)

where the n dimensional vector xµ (t) represents the change in molecular or phenotypic measurement, e.g., log ratios of molecular concentration after and before perturbation u, and n is the number
of molecule types. The initial condition is x(0) = 0. W ∈ Rn×n quantifies the directional interaction among molecules where each wij denotes the interaction from network node j to node i.
The scaling factor α quantifies the strength of the natural decay term −xµ (t), which is the tendency
of an entity to return to its steady state level before perturbation. A hyperbolic tangent envelope
function is used to introduce a saturation effect of the interaction term.
denotes element wise
multiplication.
2

Published as a workshop paper at ICLR 2021 SimDL Workshop

By integrating Eq. 1 using an ODE solver, we can predict the time evolution of xµ (t) after a given
perturbation uµ . CellBox learns these system parameters from experimental data. With given input
data, CellBox optimizes W and α by minimizing the mismatch between model predictions and
experimental measurements. Here, instead of experimental data, we provide CellBox time-series
pseudo-experimental data, generated from a given network model assumed to be the ground truth.
Multiple time points are sampled and noise is added for different perturbation conditions, which
collectively form the training data. Once trained, the models can predict the responses to unseen
perturbations of the system.
2.2

A DJOINT SENSITIVITY METHODS IN DYNAMIC SYSTEM OPTIMIZATION

The dimension of x can be on the order of hundreds and thousands (human cells have about 20,000
genes in total), thus models can have 104 − 108 interaction parameters, leading to computational
challenges for the parameter inference algorithm. Recently developed neural ODEs Chen et al.
(2018); Rubanova et al. (2019) have shown promise in efficiently learning complex dynamic models
from time-series data. One can view Eq. 1 as a neural network with single hidden layer where both
the dimension of input and output is equal to n. We have re-implemented CellBox to learn the model
parameters in the framework of neural ODEs. For instance, we denote the model predictions as
x̂µ (t) = ODESolve(

dxµ (t) µ
; x (t = 0), W, α )
dt

(2)

And we use the loss function of mean absolute error (MAE), i.e.,
Loss(W, α) = M AE (x̂µ (t), xµ (t))
µ,t

(3)

where x̂µ (t) and xµ (t) correspond to simulated and measured molecular profiles. In this work,
we use the ODE solver of the Tsitouras 5/4 Runge-Kutta method, implemented as Tsit5() in the
Julia package of DifferentialEquations.jl developed by Rackauckas & Nie (2017). The first-order
optimizer Adam proposed in Kingma & Ba (2014) implemented in Flux.jl by Innes (2018) is adopted
with a default learning rate of 0.001. Learning rate annealing is exploited. We employ weight
decay to encourage sparsity in the interaction matrix (which is expected given our understanding of
interactions in biological networks) and the value of weight decay is treated as a hyper-parameter.
To accelerate the training, the training proceeds with a specific mini-batching, in which we sample
ns = 5 time points from each perturbation condition as a single batch and we iteratively loop over
all of the perturbation conditions. Unlike regular deep learning tasks, in addition to tracking the
loss function, we also monitor the convergence of the model parameters by inspecting the Pearson
correlations between learned interaction weights and ground truth network connections, reported as
inference accuracy.

3

R ESULTS

3.1

A BSTRACT SYNTHETIC SYSTEMS

We first conduct proof-of-concept experiments by applying the CellBox algorithm to several typical
abstract networks presented in Pratapa et al. (2020), including linear (LI), cyclic (CY), and bifurcation (BI) networks. We artificially introduce perturbations into the systems and use ODE equations
to simulate pseudo-experimental response trajectories, from which samples are drawn at multiple
time points and used in training. To mimic realistic experimental setups, each synthetic perturbation
condition is constrained such that no more than 2 nodes are perturbed simultaneously and at most 5
time points are sampled. We discuss the effect of the number of nodes perturbed and the number of
time steps on model performance in Section 4.
We evaluated both the predictive accuracy of cell responses to these perturbations, as well as the
accuracy of network inference. The model was trained with as few as 10 perturbation conditions
(Table 1). Our results indicated that on these simulated biological systems, the CellBox method
could train predictive models of system responses to external perturbations (average MAE < 10−3 ),
as well as capture the system structures by inferring the network interaction parameters (average
3

Published as a workshop paper at ICLR 2021 SimDL Workshop

Table 1: Abstract synthetic systems

Pearson’s correlation> 0.9). Overall, while different systems resulted in different efficiency of
parameter inference, CellBox could be effectively trained for all four system types tested, when
provided with sufficient perturbation conditions. These results suggest the potential applicability of
such methods to diverse biological systems.
3.2

B IOLOGY- INSPIRED SYNTHETIC SYSTEMS

We tested CellBox on synthetic analogs of four real biological systems adapted from Pratapa et al.
(2020), including mammalian cortical area development (mCAD), ventral spinal cord (VSC) development, hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) differentiation and gonadal sex determination (GSD), which
were human-curated from the research literature and have been repeatedly validated by experiments.
We then used these biology-inspired synthetic system models in simulation and model training in the
same way as the synthetic systems described above. Similar to the abstract systems, these models
achieved the same level of prediction error (MAE: 10−4 -10−3 ) and inference accuracy (Pearson’s
correlation: 0.9-0.99) (Table 2) and accurately predicted post-perturbational responses in each of
the four systems described in Pratapa et al. (2020).

4

C ONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION

Constructing data-driven models for molecular interactions and cellular behavior of biological systems is useful but challenging. Here we adapted the CellBox method Yuan et al. (2020); Shen et al.
(2020), a hybridization of explicit dynamic models and machine learning optimization, with adjoint
sensitivity methods in Julia. We tested performance on a diverse range of synthetic network systems,
and demonstrate that by simulating perturbation-response data and using such data to construct interaction models, CellBox methods can be effectively trained to predict responses and reconstruct
the ground truth interaction network. The overall performance across diverse systems, including
4

Published as a workshop paper at ICLR 2021 SimDL Workshop

Table 2: Biology-inspired synthetic cellular systems

several typical abstract networks and multiple biology-inspired networks, suggest that the CellBox
can potentially be applied to a wide variety of biological systems.
Another improvement in this work compared to the first version of CellBox is that the previous
models used only single endpoint measurement, assuming the system had reached equilibrium. It
also obvious that time series data can be more informative for understanding and simulating the
system, as explored in (Nyman et al. (2020)). To explore this potential we used simulated time
series data for training. The models then are challenged to predict the full time series of the dynamic
response to perturbations. This encouraged us to redesign the optimization procedure, e.g. by
incorporating NeuralODE and adjoint sensitivity methods from Chen et al. (2018); Fröhlich et al.
(2017), as well as to challenge the model training efficiency and robustness, for which more careful
fine-tuning are used to ensure stable simulation and modeling.
The data generation procedure used here does not systematically explore what are the minimal or
optimal requirement of data for successful training. Some of the models above can be effectively
trained with even less data, e.g., only 1 time point measurement; so it is not surprising that some
biological datasets that are sparse in the time dimension are still informative. However, we did
test scenarios where each synthetic condition has more than 2 nodes perturbed or more than 5 time
points measured. As expected, increased information benefits model training and results in better
performance even with a smaller sample size. Taken together, these observations might help design
the scope of perturbation experiments needed to accurately simulate and predict the responses of
a particular system. In future work, exploring associations of experiment size and quality with
successful training would be of tremendous help in experimental design and validation.

R EFERENCES
Thalia E. Chan, Michael P.H. Stumpf, and Ann C. Babtie. Gene regulatory network inference
from single-cell data using multivariate information measures. Cell Systems, 5(3):251–267.e3,
5

Published as a workshop paper at ICLR 2021 SimDL Workshop

September 2017. doi: 10.1016/j.cels.2017.08.014.
Ricky T Q Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David Duvenaud. Neural Ordinary Differential Equations. NeurIPS, 2018.
Fabian Fröhlich, Barbara Kaltenbacher, Fabian J. Theis, and Jan Hasenauer. Scalable parameter
estimation for genome-scale biochemical reaction networks. PLOS Computational Biology, 13
(1):1–18, 01 2017. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005331.
Steven M. Hill, Nicole K. Nesser, Katie Johnson-Camacho, Mara Jeffress, Aimee Johnson, Chris
Boniface, Simon E.F. Spencer, Yiling Lu, Laura M. Heiser, Yancey Lawrence, Nupur T. Pande,
James E. Korkola, Joe W. Gray, Gordon B. Mills, Sach Mukherjee, and Paul T. Spellman. Context
Specificity in Causal Signaling Networks Revealed by Phosphoprotein Profiling. Cell Syst, 4(1):
73–83, 01 2017.
Mike Innes. Flux: Elegant machine learning with julia. Journal of Open Source Software, 3(25):
602, 2018.
Purvesh Khatri, Marina Sirota, and Atul J. Butte. Ten years of pathway analysis: current approaches
and outstanding challenges. PLoS Comput Biol, 8(2):e1002375, 2012.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Jason W. Locasale and Alejandro Wolf-Yadlin. Maximum entropy reconstructions of dynamic signaling networks from quantitative proteomics data. PLoS One, 4(8):e6522, Aug 2009.
Grégoire Montavon, Wojciech Samek, and Klaus-Robert Müller. Methods for interpreting and understanding deep neural networks. 73:1–15, 2018.
Elin Nyman, Richard R. Stein, Xiaohong Jing, Weiqing Wang, Benjamin Marks, Ioannis K. Zervantonakis, Anil Korkut, Nicholas P. Gauthier, and Chris Sander. Perturbation biology links temporal
protein changes to drug responses in a melanoma cell line. PLOS Computational Biology, 16(7):
1–26, 07 2020. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007909.
Aditya Pratapa, Amogh P. Jalihal, Jeffrey N. Law, Aditya Bharadwaj, and T. M. Murali. Benchmarking algorithms for gene regulatory network inference from single-cell transcriptomic data.
Nature Methods, 17(2):147–154, 2020. ISSN 15487105. doi: 10.1038/s41592-019-0690-6.
Christopher Rackauckas and Qing Nie. Differentialequations. jl–a performant and feature-rich
ecosystem for solving differential equations in julia. Journal of Open Research Software, 5(1),
2017.
Christopher Rackauckas, Yingbo Ma, Julius Martensen, Collin Warner, Kirill Zubov, Rohit Supekar,
Dominic Skinner, Ali Ramadhan, and Alan Edelman. Universal differential equations for scientific machine learning. 2020.
Yulia Rubanova, Ricky TQ Chen, and David Duvenaud. Latent odes for irregularly-sampled time
series. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.03907, 2019.
Ciyue Shen, Bo Yuan, and Chris Sander. Constructing data-driven network models of cell dynamics with perturbation experiments. Learning Meaningful Representations of Life workshop at
NeurIPS 2020, 2020.
Bo Yuan, Ciyue Shen, Augustin Luna, Anil Korkut, Debora S Marks, John Ingraham, and Chris
Sander. Cellbox: Interpretable machine learning for perturbation biology with application to the
design of cancer combination therapy. Cell Systems, 2020.
Jian Zhou and Olga G Troyanskaya. Predicting effects of noncoding variants with deep learningbased sequence model. Nat Methods, 12(10):931–934, Oct 2015.
Min Zou and Suzanne D. Conzen. A New Dynamic Bayesian Network (DBN) Approach for Identifying Gene Regulatory Networks From Time Course Microarray Data. Bioinformatics (Oxford,
England), 21(1), 2005. ISSN 1367-4803. doi: 10.1093/BIOINFORMATICS/BTH463.
6

